
---PAGE 1---
University of Missouri, St. Louis
IRL @ UMSL
Dissertations UMSL Graduate Works
12-12-2016
Questioning the Questioner: The Effect of
Applicant Questions on Interview Outcomes
Heather Grace Heimbaugh
University of Missouri-St. Louis
Follow this and additional works at: https://irl.umsl.edu/dissertation
Part of the Psychology Commons
This Dissertation is brought to you for free and open access by the UMSL Graduate Works at IRL @ UMSL. It has been accepted for inclusion in
Dissertations by an authorized administrator of IRL @ UMSL. For more information, please contact marvinh@umsl.edu.
Recommended Citation
Heimbaugh, Heather Grace, "Questioning the Questioner: The Effect of Applicant Questions on Interview Outcomes" (2016).
Dissertations. 46.
https://irl.umsl.edu/dissertation/46
---PAGE 2---
Running head: EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Questioning the Questioner: The Effect of Applicant Questions on Interview Outcomes 
 
 
Heather G. Heimbaugh 
M.A., Industrial/Organizational Psychology, University of Missouri-St. Louis, 2011 
B.A., Psychology and English, Truman State University, 2008 
 
 
 
 
A Dissertation Submitted to The Graduate School at the University of Missouri-St. Louis 
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree 
Doctor of Philosophy in Psychology with an emphasis in Industrial/Organizational 
Psychology 
 
 
 
December 2016 
 
 
 
Advisory Committee 
 
Therese Macan, Ph.D. 
Chairperson 
 
Stephanie Merritt, Ph.D. 
 
John Meriac, Ph.D. 
 
Alice Hall, Ph.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright, Heather G. Heimbaugh, 2016  
---PAGE 3---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 2 
Abstract 
There is a great deal of advice available from authors of interviewing guidebooks 
regarding the types of questions applicants should ask during the job interview, if any. 
Yet, there has been limited research investigating the impact of applicant questions to the 
interviewer on interview outcomes to support the varied opinions disseminated. This 
paper focuses on how whether applicants ask questions during employment interviews 
affects the attributions and hiring ratings interviewers make of applicants. The variables 
examined (applicant résumé qualifications, applicant interview performance before 
questions are asked, whether the questions can or cannot be answered on the company 
website, and whether interviewers believe in general that applicants should or should not 
ask questions) are rooted within a larger process model of applicant interviewing 
behaviors, also presented in this paper. Employed business and psychology students 
(N=353) assumed the role of interviewer and evaluated a single candidate for a 
management trainee position based on a résumé and videotaped interview performance. 
Results from two studies support the idea that whether or not the applicant asks 
questions, and in fewer cases whether the questions could have been answered in 
advance, can affect the attributions interviewers make about applicants. However, more 
than the questions applicants ask, the interview performance of the applicant has an even 
greater impact on both attributions made about the applicant and hiring ratings. This line 
of research has important real world implications, given that it can help guide job 
applicants to successful questioning behaviors during the interview.  
 Keywords: job interviews, applicant questions, interviewer expectations 
  
---PAGE 4---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 3 
Questioning the Questioner:  
The Effect of Applicant Questions on Interview Outcomes 
Although job interviews can vary greatly in their content and degree of structure, 
one aspect is almost certain: applicants expect to be asked questions to assess their 
qualifications and/or fit with the organization. Applicants may also expect that they will 
be able to ask their own questions during the interview to help them determine whether 
the job and organization meet their expectations. While the former (i.e., what will the 
interviewer ask?) is often the cause of worry and consternation among job applicants, the 
latter (i.e., what should I ask the interviewer?) may be largely overlooked during pre-
interview preparations. Before the interview, many job applicants may attempt to ready 
themselves by researching the organization, trying to figure out what the interviewer will 
ask them, and reviewing past experiences to determine which are most appropriate to 
share. Although it makes sense that applicants will want to anticipate the questions they 
might be asked, perhaps similar emphasis should be placed preparing for the another 
aspect of the interview that they have greater control over: determining what questions, if 
any, they would like to ask the interviewer.  
Despite the limited empirical research for applicants to turn to in order to 
determine the best types of questions to ask, there is no shortage of advice in interviewing 
coaching materials. Yet, the perspectives of authors sharing their opinions can be 
dissenting, making it all the more difficult to know what to believe. Applicants may 
struggle to determine whether it is in their best interest to ask anything, and if so, to 
understand what makes some questions superior to others. It is imperative that 
researchers investigate the effects of applicant questioning behaviors, both to enhance our 
---PAGE 5---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 4 
shared knowledge in this under-researched area, and to be able to give more meaningful 
advice to the multitude of job applicants who are unsure of how to make the best 
impression during their interview. The current research aims to progress what is known 
about applicant questioning through the completion of two main objectives.  
The first objective is to propose a process model of applicant questioning 
behaviors, with the hope that this model may serve as a guide to direct future research in 
this area. At this point in time, research on the antecedents and effects of applicant 
questions lacks clear organization, with many of the variables appearing in research 
seeming haphazardly chosen. Furthermore, conclusions are offered with little discussion 
of the countless other variables that have the potential to affect the relationships 
examined. The model is a way of visualizing the wide expanse of variables likely to play 
a role in why questions are asked, how they are perceived, and how they affect interview 
outcomes such as hiring ratings. Such a model can help researchers identify what is 
currently missing from the research, and help guide decisions about what to address next. 
The model is organized into three parts: (1) Pre-questioning, describing the applicant 
characteristics, motives, and situational variables that likely influence decisions about 
asking questions, (2) questioning, including extent of inquiry and a number of moderating 
variables that may affect the relationship between extent of inquiry and outcomes, and (3) 
post-questioning, including interviewer attributions and ratings of the applicant, as well 
as a feedback loop that contributes to further decisions regarding extent of inquiry.  
Following the presentation of the model, the second objective of this study is to 
investigate the effects of certain elements of the proposed model on attributions and 
ratings of the applicant. The effects that will be examined include: (1) whether the 
---PAGE 6---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 5 
applicant asks any questions and if so, whether these questions are answered on the 
organization’s website, (2) whether the “interviewer” (participant) believes that 
applicants should ask questions during job interviews, and (3) whether the effect of 
applicant questions (i.e., asking no questions, asking questions that cannot be answered 
on the website, or asking questions that can be answered on the website) on ultimate 
hiring ratings depends on applicant qualifications or interview performance. Investigating 
these elements will help illuminate the situations and question characteristics with the 
potential to alter perceptions and evaluations of applicants. 
The testing of the third element listed (i.e., determining whether the effects of 
applicant questions differ as a function of qualifications) will be split between two 
studies: the first study addressing pre-interview qualifications and the second study 
addressing applicant interview performance. The purpose of including applicant 
qualifications as a variable is to determine in what situations questions have the greatest 
or smallest impact. After all, applicant questions do not happen in isolation; after the 
résumé and the interview, interviewers have formulated impressions of the applicant. 
Applicants who are well qualified may not benefit as much from asking good questions 
as marginally qualified applicants because their ratings would likely already be high. On 
the other hand qualified applicants might be perceived less negatively for not asking 
questions that a marginal applicant already on the fence. While “bad” questions could 
potentially take a marginal applicant out of the running for the position, an otherwise 
qualified applicant might still get by on their strong qualifications. Despite these 
possibilities, it is unknown whether the effect of asking negatively perceived questions, 
asking no questions, or asking positively perceived questions on hiring ratings is different 
---PAGE 7---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 6 
for marginally qualified versus well-qualified applicants (Study 1) or those who perform 
well in the interview versus those who perform more poorly (Study 2).  
The two objectives, when taken as a whole, essentially get to the root of the 
matter of whether applicant questions make a difference. That is, do applicant questions 
have any real impact on interview ratings beyond the applicants’ answers to interview 
questions? Coaching materials would have applicants believe that yes, they do. The 
following section will review theoretical and empirical evidence regarding the impact of 
applicant questions gathered from academic research and coaching materials 
The Other Side of the Desk: Why Does the Applicant Matter? 
It is widely understood by applicants and interviewers alike that the interview is a 
method for assessing applicant qualifications and fit with the job/organization. Yet, 
viewing the interview as a one-sided interrogation used solely as a means for the 
interviewer to collect information ignores an essential part of the interview – applicant 
information gathering (Dipboye, Macan, & Shahani-Denning, 2012). The interview is an 
interaction, and both the interviewer and the applicant use the interview to “collect 
information, make judgments, [and] manage impressions” (Macan & Merritt, 2011, p. 
239). Furthermore, Dipboye and colleagues argue that both the applicant and interviewer 
perspectives are vital aspects of the interaction; in order to fully understand the interview, 
one must consider how the two perspectives together influence the process and outcomes. 
As such, understanding the interview involves recognizing that interviewers and 
applicants often have competing objectives. On the one hand, interviewers hope to gauge 
whether the applicant will be successful in the position; on the other, applicants expect to 
use the interview to discern whether they feel the organization is a good fit for their 
---PAGE 8---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 7 
values and skill sets (Dipboye et al., 2012). Both objectives play a role in determining the 
course of the interview and interview outcomes. Thus, it is not only important to 
understand how interviewer questions to applicants affect outcomes, but also to 
understand the effect of applicant questions on outcomes.  
Existing research on signaling theory and impression management may help 
explain why applicant questions have the potential to influence interview outcomes. 
Signaling theory (Spence, 1973), states that when information is incomplete, decision 
makers use the information at their disposal to make inferences about things they cannot 
directly know for sure. Applied to the job interview, interviewers may be looking for cues 
of applicant quality from applicant answers to interview questions, applicant behaviors, 
or even applicant-generated questions to the interviewer. Given that applicants have 
discretion over exactly what they ask, applicant questions may be perceived as a signal of 
what the applicant considers most important, thus providing the interviewer with 
additional information about whether the applicant is a good match for the organization. 
Applicant questions might also convey applicant quality to the extent that questions seem 
well researched and insightful. These signals may then affect the attributions made about 
the applicant, and consequent ratings.  
In addition to signaling quality, applicant questioning behaviors also have the 
potential to serve as a form of impression management. Previous research has established 
that impression management behaviors affect interview ratings (e.g., Kristof-Brown, 
Barrick, & Franke, 2002) for both structured and unstructured interviews (Stevens & 
Kristof, 1995). For instance, research supports both self-focused impression management 
(i.e., behaviors that portray the individual as competent through tactics such as self-
---PAGE 9---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 8 
promotion) and other-focused impression management (i.e., behaviors directed at others 
to elicit feelings of similarity, liking, or fit) positively relating to interview evaluations 
(Kacmar, Delery, & Ferris, 1992; Wayne & Kacmar, 1991). While self-focused questions 
(e.g., What can I do to exceed expectations in my first month working here?) may 
function similarly to self-focused impression management, asking questions about the 
interviewer (e.g., What do you like best about working here?) may behave similarly to 
other-focused impression management, especially other-enhancement (i.e., flattery; Van 
Iddekinge et al., 2007) by insinuating that the applicant values the interviewer’s opinions 
and is interested in what the interviewer has to say. 
Even authors of interviewing coaching materials recognize the impression 
management potential of applicant questions. Kador (2010), author of 301 Best Questions 
to Ask on Your Interview, goes so far as to say that the primary goal of the applicant 
asking questions during the interview is not to elicit information from the interviewer, but 
rather to manage one’s impression by presenting an appealing image. From this 
perspective, applicant questions are actually statements about oneself masquerading as 
questions. For example, applicants who ask the interviewer how they can best contribute 
to the organization in the first sixty days on the job portray a message that they are 
willing to take the job seriously and are eager to leverage their talents to further 
organizational success. 
Both signaling theory and impression management research provide theoretical 
support for the notion that applicant questions could influence applicant evaluations 
during employment interviews. However, empirical research is needed that directly 
assesses the impact of applicant questioning behaviors during the interview. Existing 
---PAGE 10---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 9 
academic research directly exploring the effects of applicant questions is limited. Only a 
handful of articles address the topic, the majority of which have been published in 
communication journals (e.g., see Babbitt & Jablin, 1985; Einhorn, 1981; Goldberg & 
Cohen, 2004; Jablin & Miller, 1990; Taylor, Coolsen, & Reese, 2010; Taylor, Friedman, 
& Coolsen, 2013; Tullar, 1989). Of these articles, applicant questions were the focal 
interest for three papers (Babbitt & Jablin, 1985; Taylor, Coolsen, & Reese, 2010; Taylor, 
Friedman, & Coolsen, 2013). Applicant questions shared the spotlight with interviewer 
questions in another (Jablin & Miller, 1990), and for the remaining research applicant 
questions played a limited role overshadowed by other primary research prerogatives. 
These research objectives included investigating the overall communication strategies of 
effective versus ineffective interviewees (Einhorn, 1981), examining whether gender 
affects the success of nonverbal and verbal interviewing behaviors (Goldberg & Cohen, 
2004), and exploring how employment interviews function as cognitive scripts (Tullar, 
1989). 
 Although research regarding applicant questions is limited and applicant 
questions are rarely the focal point, advice offered by authors of interviewing coaching 
materials and self-help articles is plentiful. Many of these authors suggest that applicants 
failing to ask questions during the interview will ultimately be less successful than those 
who ask questions (e.g., Adler, 2008; Deluca & Deluca, 2004; Fry, 2009; Green, 2012; 
Kador, 2010; Moreira, 2002; Peterson, n.d.; 2012; Williams, 2008). “‘Most people think 
all they are supposed to do is answer questions during an interview,’ said Linda Burtch, 
managing director at Smith Hanley Associates LLC, a national recruiting firm. ‘I tell all 
my candidates that their job is to ask questions’” (Adler, 2000, p. 64). Others echo this 
---PAGE 11---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 10 
sentiment, writing that applicants should never say they have no questions during an 
interview (Morriera, 2002). These authors believe that failing to ask questions may be the 
weakest response individuals can provide when prompted for questions (Deluca, 2004), 
because it can give the false impression that they are not interested in the position 
(Williams, 2008) and that they have not done enough background research on the 
organization to even know what to ask (Levit, 2009).  
Instead of shying away from questions when the opportunity arises, some authors 
urge applicants to use them to their advantage. Kador (2010) writes that in a monotonous 
sea of rehearsed answers to interview questions, asking the interviewer questions is the 
only real chance applicants have to distinguish themselves from the pack. In fact, in some 
cases, the questions asked by applicants may be even more revealing than their answers 
to the interview questions. Applicants hope that these questions will set them apart in a 
good way, but questions could also backfire if they are generic, poorly thought-out, or not 
well received by the interviewer (Peterson, n.d.).  
The possibility of questions negatively influencing interview outcomes leads 
others to caution applicants against asking them altogether, although this advice is more 
unusual. Shapiro (2008) suggests that applicants abstain from asking questions until a 
formal offer has been made. She believes that too often applicants fall into the trap of 
trying to impress the interviewer with what they know about the company, but rarely do 
they have enough insider information to actually impress the interviewer. Asking 
questions just for the sake of it has the potential to come off as insincere and decrease 
liking for the applicant (Fiegerman, 2011). 
---PAGE 12---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 11 
Most mainstream interviewing books and articles go one step further than 
advising the applicant on whether or not to ask questions by directing readers on exactly 
what types of questions to ask. While there is certainly some overlap among authors 
regarding appropriate questions, there appears to be greater consensus on what types of 
questions to avoid (e.g., questions about pay, benefits, scheduling, time off). Although 
there is some initial empirical evidence examining how question content affects interview 
outcomes (Taylor, Coolsen, & Reese, 2010; Taylor, Friedman, & Coolsen, 2013) and a 
scattering of advice regarding other areas such as question structure (Babbitt & Jablin, 
1985; Einhorn, 1983) there remains much to be learned about what makes applicant 
questions “good” (i.e., positively perceived) or “bad” (i.e., negatively perceived).  
In an early work on applicant communication strategies, Einhorn (1983) identified 
93 behaviors she believed were related to effective interview communication, one of 
which was applicant questioning. Specifically, by examining the transcripts and video 
footage of seven successful interviews and seven unsuccessful interviewees, she 
concluded that successful applicants tended to ask specific, covered a variety of topics, 
and were phrased in the first person. It is unclear whether she defined variety of topics as 
variety within-person (meaning each successful applicant asked many questions covering 
multiple topics) or variety between applicants (as in, collectively the group of successful 
applicants covered a variety of topics). All the examples of questions she provided to 
demonstrate the variety of topics dealt with either the job or organization, so it may be 
the case that variety refers to an assortment of more specific topics within the same 
general categorization, rather than variety spanning larger categories (e.g., the selection 
process, pay, the job, the organization, etc.).  
---PAGE 13---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 12 
There were certain limitations to Einhorn’s study as well. For one, her sample size 
was very small. Thus, while her conclusions indicate initial trends, a larger sample size is 
needed to provide more evidence of the trends she identified. Furthermore, she defined 
successful and unsuccessful applicants as those who statistically significantly improved 
or worsened their post interview ratings (based on education, work experience, 
personality, motivation, and hiring rating) from their pre-interview ratings, which were 
based on only their résumé. She threw out nine individuals whose scores did not 
statistically significantly change, but in doing so may have removed some applicants who 
could not “statistically significantly improve” their rating because they started out with 
high pre-interview ratings (although these applicants are undoubtedly successful). Adding 
to the confusion is that Einhorn never defined what she meant by a “significant change” 
in ratings. Finally, Einhorn did not conduct any analyses to determine if unsuccessful and 
successful applicants statistically differed in terms of their question asking, so the 
suggested characteristics of successful questions remained in need of verification. 
Babbitt and Jablin (1985), however, did analyze the differences in the success 
rates of a number of question characteristics. Despite Einhorn’s (1983) observation that 
successful applicants typically asked questions in the first person, Babbitt and Jablin 
found no difference in the number of first-person questions asked by successful versus 
unsuccessful applicants. They did find, however, that applicants securing second 
interview offers typically asked more questions looking for new information than 
questions seeking clarification or opinions from the interviewer. They also asked fewer 
questions seeking information not relevant to the job, and tended to ask fewer questions 
about the process than unsuccessful applicants. In general, applicants asked more closed 
---PAGE 14---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 13 
than open-ended questions, and questions that were on average nine words long, although 
neither openness nor length were related to applicant success.  
More recently, Taylor, Coolsen, and Reese (2010) distributed a survey of 
applicant questions to members of a human resources professional organization. 
Participants were asked to indicate whether each question would influence their rating of 
an applicant positively, negatively, or not at all. Only questions regarding “the company’s 
history, revenue, and/or products and services” were rated as likely negatively 
influencing evaluations of the applicant. Even then, the magnitude of the effect was 
rather small. The authors concluded that only questions that could have been answered in 
advance, via the organization’s website, for instance, are not well received. Perhaps more 
surprisingly, participants did not perceive questions about salary and benefits as negative. 
In fact, these questions were rated as having more positive impacts on ratings than 
questions about the hiring process. Yet, questions about the job and organization were 
rated most favorably. Finally, participants reported that failing to ask any questions 
would have, in their opinions, an extremely negative effect on evaluations of an 
applicant.  
Taylor, Friedman, and Coolsen continued to investigate the impact of question 
content in a follow-up study (2013). In this study, members of the Society for Human 
Resource Management (SHRM) were presented with a brief interview transcript differing 
in the type of questions asked (questions about salary and benefits, the hiring process, the 
organization, the job, or no questions). Although participants believed that questions 
about the job, organization, and hiring process would positively affect interview 
evaluations, when it came down to reading the vignettes and making ratings, the only 
---PAGE 15---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 14 
differences in ratings were between questions about the job and asking no questions, and 
questions about the job and questions about salary and benefits, with applicants asking 
questions about the job receiving higher ratings each time. In an attempt to explain the 
reason for these differences, the authors also examined perceptions of the applicant’s 
personality in terms of extraversion, conscientiousness, and openness to experience. They 
found that applicants asking about the organization, job, or hiring process were assessed 
to be more extraverted and open to experience than those asking no questions. While no 
statistical differences were found for conscientiousness, the means were in the predicted 
direction, with those asking about the organization, job, and hiring process being higher 
than those asking about salary and benefits or no questions. 
A Proposed Model of Applicant Questioning Behaviors 
Although the research above provides some insight into how applicant questions 
may impact interview outcomes, there are a number of additional variables (i.e., question, 
applicant, interviewer, and interview characteristics) with the potential to moderate these 
relationships. These moderators are captured in the process model of applicant 
questioning behaviors (Figure 1). The model has three parts that are meant to be 
somewhat fluid. That is, one part of the model does not necessarily “end” as another 
“begins,” and there is no defining event that marks the beginning or end of each section; 
rather applicants may move between them, both progressing and digressing as the 
interview evolves. The fluidity is further captured in the model by a feedback loop, to 
show that the reactions interviewers have to applicant questions do not mark the end of 
the process, but may play a role in determining whether applicants ask additional 
questions. Furthermore, the various aspects of the model are not limited to one part of the 
---PAGE 16---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 15 
interview. For instance, pre-questioning does not necessarily begin only after the 
interviewer has asked all of his or her questions, because the applicant may decide to ask 
questions at any given point at the beginning, middle, or end of the interview. Thus, the 
process model is meant to overlap with various parts of the interview on a situational 
basis.  
Of the three sections of the model, first is pre-questioning, in which the motives 
and characteristics of the applicant, along with various situational factors, influence 
whether the applicant decides to ask any questions of the interviewer. The influences 
important to pre-questioning affect the questioning section of the model, in which the 
applicant acts on the intentions to ask or not ask questions developed during the previous 
section. This is captured by the “extent of inquiry” variable in the model. This variable 
not only captures whether or not the applicant decides to ask questions, but also the 
number of questions the applicant asks at any given instance during the interview. As the 
applicant asks questions, a number of moderating variables may influence the 
relationship between extent of inquiry and later outcomes. These moderating variables 
can be classified under one of four categories: question characteristics, applicant 
characteristics, interviewer characteristics, or interview characteristics. Following the 
questioning section is post-questioning. This part of the model includes the important 
outcomes resulting from the combined effects of moderating variables and the extent of 
inquiry, including the attributions made about the applicant by the interviewer and ratings 
of the applicant. Also included in this section is a feedback loop consisting of the verbal 
or nonverbal feedback from the interviewer that may affect whether the applicant 
continues to ask questions.  
---PAGE 17---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 16 
While the model is conceptualized in terms of a more typical interviewing 
interaction between one interview and one interviewee, it is possible to apply the model 
to other types of interviews (e.g., panel, telephone, video, etc.) with certain modifications. 
For instance, in a panel interview, a greater number of interviewers has the potential to 
complicate some of the variables in the model such as perceived interviewer receptivity 
to questions, given that the applicant has to take into account multiple interviewers with 
potentially conflicting perceived receptivity to questions. Furthermore, different 
interviewers on a panel may exhibit different reactions to questions if they are asked, 
which could complicate the applicant’s decision to ask more questions. The model should 
also hold for the most part in video or phone interviews. Again, however, some tweaks 
may be needed in order to retain complete relevancy. For instance, in telephone 
interviews, interviewer non-verbal behavior will not be as strong of a determinant of 
whether the applicant asks questions, and applicant nonverbal behavior will not interact 
as strongly with extent of inquiry to affect interview outcomes, nor will interviewer non-
verbal behavior play as large a role in the feedback loop. Furthermore, the norms of the 
interview may change somewhat in non-face-to-face interviews. These are areas that 
future research is encouraged to explore, but will not be the main focus of this research. 
Each section of the process model of applicant questioning will now be discussed in more 
detail. 
Pre-questioning. As the interview takes place, applicants must weigh any 
motivations they have for asking questions against situational characteristics in order to 
determine whether they wish to ask the interviewer any questions. This rapid analysis of 
the situation and motives to arrive at a decision to ask or not ask questions may operate 
---PAGE 18---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 17 
outside of conscious awareness, especially given that the applicant is likely preoccupied 
with answering questions and managing impressions. Furthermore, applicant 
characteristics such as personality or anxiety may also influence the extent of applicant 
inquiry. All variables fueling the intention to ask or not ask questions are captured on the 
left side of Figure 1 in the first section of the process model, pre-questioning.  
Applicant motives and characteristics. Two applicant-centered influences on 
applicant extent of inquiry are applicant motives and applicant characteristics.  
Applicant motives. There are a variety of reasons applicants may wish to ask 
questions during the interview. While applicants may experience only one motive, the 
likelier case is that they simultaneously experience a number of motives for asking 
questions. A genuine interest in learning about the job or organization in hope of 
developing realistic expectations may fuel applicant inquiries (Coelimeyer & Berchtold, 
1982). Other motives include determining person-job or person-organization fit, 
balancing the uneven power distribution inherent to the interview (Babbitt & Jablin, 
1985), and showing preparedness (Peterson, n.d.). The latter motive, the desire to show 
interview preparation, blends seamlessly with impression management motives. Even if 
applicants are not aware they are doing so, for most, impression management is a strong 
motivator during the interview. The desire to convey the image of a proactive, interested, 
or knowledgeable applicant (Johnson, 2012; Peterson, n.d.), should lead applicants to ask 
questions that they feel convey the desired impression (Kador, 2010). Although the 
motives listed above are not exhaustive, they represent a sampling of the many reasons 
applicants may have for asking or not asking questions during the interview.  
---PAGE 19---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 18 
Applicant characteristics. Certain applicant characteristics such as personality and 
trait anxiety may also contribute to decisions to ask or not ask questions. Of the Big Five 
personality traits, extraversion, conscientiousness, and openness to experience may be 
particularly related to applicant extent of inquiry. Extraverted individuals, characterized 
by their outgoingness and love of social interaction, are routinely found to be more 
confident in social situations as well as better able to handle social interactions than those 
who are more introverted (Costa & McCrae, 1992). Extraverted individuals, then, should 
feel more comfortable initiating interactions, such as asking questions, with the 
interviewer. Conscientious individuals are responsible, organized, detail orientated, 
driven (Barrick & Mount, 1991), planful, and thorough information gatherers (Costa & 
McCrae, 1988). As job applicants, conscientious individuals were more likely than less 
conscientious individuals to prepare for interviews and gather information in advance 
through social means; that is, by asking questions and talking to other individuals about 
the job and organization (Caldwell & Burger, 1998). Their strong tendency towards 
information gathering may prompt continued information gathering during the interview 
by asking the interviewer questions. Finally, individuals high in openness to experience, 
characterized by curiosity, are also more inclined to gather information than individuals 
who score lower on this personality dimension (McCrae & Costa, 1985). As a 
consequence, individuals high in openness may be more inclined to ask questions during 
the interview. 
Trait anxiety is another applicant characteristic likely to contribute to applicant 
extent of inquiry. Specifically, communication apprehension, or the anxiety an individual 
experiences before or during communications with others (McCroskey, 1977) may 
---PAGE 20---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 19 
influence an applicant’s level of comfort with asking questions. Individuals with inflated 
communication anxiety tend to avoid communication (McCrosky, Daly, & Sorenson, 
1976; Beatty, 1987). If complete avoidance is not possible, they minimize 
communications by curtailing social interactions as soon as possible (Lazarus & Averill, 
1972), and reducing their verbal output to the bare necessity (McCroskey, 1984). 
Students with communication apprehension have been found to ask fewer questions in 
classroom settings (Aitken & Neer, 1993). Thus, individuals with heightened 
communication anxiety may conceivably wish to reduce prolonged interaction with 
interviewers by refraining from any sort of communication that might lengthen the 
interview, including applicant questioning. 
Situational determinants. In addition to the individual motivations and 
characteristics described above, there are a number of situational determinants with the 
potential to affect questioning behavior, included in a separate box in Figure 1. Many of 
the situational determinants deal with applicant perceptions, including perceptions of 
expected interviewing behaviors, personal interview performance, and interviewer 
receptiveness to questions as indicated by verbal and nonverbal behaviors. Other 
situational determinants pertain to situation specific applicant characteristics (i.e., self-
efficacy, comfort), situation specific applicant behaviors (i.e., preparation), as well as 
interview-specific characteristics (i.e., interview purpose and stage). 
Applicant perceptions of the situation. First, the interview is a rule-bound 
interaction. In other words, a specific set of social rules, or beliefs about which behaviors 
are appropriate and expected, apply to the interview (Argyle, Furnham, & Graham, 
1981). Social rules have been found to influence the behaviors of individuals (Herriot, 
---PAGE 21---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 20 
1989). Consequently, applicants’ preconceived notions about whether or not they are 
supposed to ask questions may influence whether they actually engage in this behavior.  
Applicant perceptions of previous or current interview performance may also 
influence whether they ask questions by affecting task persistence. To understand their 
current interview performance, applicants are apt to look for clues (i.e. seek feedback) 
from the interviewer’s nonverbal behavior. Feedback seeking was found to be more 
frequent in uncertain situations (Ashford, 1986), when contingency uncertainty is high; 
(i.e., when it is ambiguous which behaviors lead to good performance ratings), and when 
organizational tenure is low (Ashford & Cummings, 1985), characteristics typical of the 
interview. By remaining vigilant to indications of performance while interviewing, the 
applicant can get a better idea of which behaviors are positively or negatively received, 
and decide with greater confidence whether applicant inquiry should be pursued. For 
instance, if the applicant has a very assertive style, and the interviewer responds with 
positive feedback, the applicant may feel more comfortable with taking some control of 
the interview and asking unsolicited questions. If feedback about performance is 
extremely negative, however, it has been suggested that individuals are less likely to 
persist with the task (DeShon & Alexander, 1996). Thus, applicants who feel they are not 
performing well may disengage from the interview altogether, and decide there is no 
point in asking questions.  
Applicant perceptions of interviewer receptivity to questions may also influence 
extent of applicant inquiry. The time during the interview at which the applicant is 
considering asking the question, whether the interviewer asks for questions, applicant 
self-monitoring, and interviewer nonverbal behaviors are possible contributors to these 
---PAGE 22---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 21 
perceptions. Some applicants may believe they should hold all questions to the end of the 
interview, while others feel comfortable asking questions as they naturally arise 
throughout. The interviewer can make clear the appropriate time for applicants to ask 
questions by telling applicants when questions are welcome (e.g., throughout the 
interview, at the beginning, at the end, never). Explicitly asking for questions seems to be 
common practice among interviewers; in one study, all but 10 of 49 interviewers (roughly 
80%) did so (Babbitt, 1985). Directly asking applicants for questions allows applicants 
the opportunity to comfortably express their queries free from concern of doing so at the 
wrong time. On the other hand, when interviewers do not ask for questions, the 
perceptive applicant may feel pressured to keep questions to a minimum. Of course, to 
some degree, the ability to pick up on and interpret interviewer social cues may depend 
upon applicant self-monitoring (Snyder, 1974). High self-monitors tend to read the social 
situation around them, and behave in ways that others will view favorably given the 
situation. In other words, they use information from their environment to better 
understand how they might project a favorable self-image. An applicant who is a high 
self-monitor might be more likely to use situational cues to determine whether it is 
appropriate to ask questions or not, and then act accordingly. 
Applicant perceptions of interviewer nonverbal behavior may also clarify 
interviewer receptivity to questions, thereby influencing the extent of applicant inquiry. 
In Dipboye and Macan’s (1988) interview process model, the authors proposed that 
applicants use interviewers’ nonverbal behaviors as cues to their performance. Positive 
applicant perceptions of performance prompted by affirmative or encouraging 
interviewer nonverbal behavior may lead to decreased performance anxiety, and 
---PAGE 23---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 22 
consequently increased applicant-initiated inquiries (McCarthy & Goffin, 2004), while 
closed or disinterested nonverbal behavior may do just the opposite.  
Situation specific applicant characteristics. In addition to the aforementioned 
applicant perceptions of various situational attributes, applicant characteristics tied to the 
interviewing situation (i.e., self-efficacy, comfort with the interviewer, and interview 
preparation) may also influence the extent of inquiry. Applicant self-efficacy has been 
found to be related to extraversion and conscientiousness, (Tay, Ang, & Van Dyne, 
2006). These individuals are assertive and do not shy away from the spotlight, often 
assuming leadership roles (Kirkpatrick & Locke, 1991). Self-efficacy should therefore 
translate to more assertive interview behaviors, such as asking questions (especially 
doing so without the interviewer asking for them).  
Applicant comfort with the interviewer is also expected to relate to applicant 
extent of inquiry. Again, the nonverbal behavior of the interviewer may play a role in 
how comfortable the applicant feels with the interviewer and with asking questions. 
Nonverbal behaviors have been shown to communicate verticality, a construct relating to 
“power, dominance, status, hierarchy, and related constructs” (Hall, Coats, and Smith-
LeBeau, 2005). Individuals associated higher verticality with a vast array of nonverbal 
behaviors, including facial cues (i.e., less smiling, lowered brows, expressive faces, 
increased gaze), gestures (i.e., more nodding, touching of others, and hand gestures; and 
less self-touching), bodily positioning (more body openness and shifting; and less bodily 
relaxation and interpersonal distance), and vocal cues (i.e., more vocal variability, 
interruptions, laughter; less pausing; and fewer speech errors, lower voice, faster speech, 
and more relaxed voice) (Hall, Coats, & Smith-LeBeau, 2005). Thus, when applicants 
---PAGE 24---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 23 
perceive a number of these nonverbal behaviors from the interviewer, the emphasized 
power differential puts the interviewer in a position of perceived authority. Applicants 
uncomfortable in this type of situation may take a submissive role, and wait until asked 
for questions before offering them.  
A final situational characteristic that may influence applicant extent of inquiry is 
applicant preparation for the interview. In the education literature, preparation for class 
has frequently been linked to increased participation by increasing students’ confidence 
(Fassinger, 1995; Neer, 1987; Neer & Kircher; 1989; Wade, 1994). Many proposed 
interventions to increase participation, as a consequence, are based in some way around 
increasing preparation (Cohen, 1991; Crone, 1997). Thus, in the employment interview, a 
prepared applicant may feel more comfortable communicating and even asking the 
interviewer some of their own questions, especially if the applicant explicitly prepared 
the questions ahead of time.  
Interview characteristics. Finally, also included in the category of situational 
determinants are characteristics of the interview. One interview characteristics likely 
related to applicant extent of inquiry is the purpose of the interview. First, while some 
interviews focus on either recruitment or selection (Barber, Hollenbeck, Tower, & 
Phillips, 1994), most contain a dual purpose of both (Rynes, 1989). During recruitment 
interviews, the interviewer’s main objectives are to share organizational information and 
increase applicant attraction, while the applicant’s main objectives are to acquire and 
retain as much of the information disseminated by the interviewer as possible (Barber et 
al.,1994). Applicant attention is not divided between giving and receiving information, 
and as a result more cognitive resources can be devoted to information gathering 
---PAGE 25---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 24 
strategies, such as applicant questioning. For both dual purpose and selection interviews, 
the demands placed upon applicants are more intense because applicants must 
concurrently answer the interviewer’s questions and gather information about the 
organization to determine organizational attraction. High attentional demands such as 
these were related to poor task performance in novel settings (Kanfer & Ackerman, 
1989). Furthermore, the information acquisition abilities of applicants were stunted in 
dual-purpose interviews, likely because most of the applicant’s resources were spent 
answering the interviewer’s questions (Barber et al., 1994). Information acquisition was 
even lower when additional resources were depleted due to self-monitoring, trait anxiety, 
and low cognitive ability (Barber et al., 1994). Consequently, in recruitment interviews, 
applicants’ undivided focus on information gathering may enable them to ask more 
questions, while in dual-purpose or selection interviews, sufficiently answering the 
interviewer’s questions may take precedence over applicants asking their own questions.  
Another interview characteristic likely to affect applicant extent of inquiry is the 
degree of interview structure. Campion, Palmer, and Campion (1997), proposed 15 
elements descriptive of structured interviews, one of which was not allowing applicant 
questions until after the interview is finished to prevent content contamination. Interviews 
may vary in their degree of structure, not necessarily heeding all 15 of the elements 
discussed to be considered “structured.” In the event that interviews are structured in 
regard to not allowing applicant questions, though, applicants may feel less at ease asking 
questions during the interview than those engaged in a less structured, more 
conversational interview.  
---PAGE 26---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 25 
Applicant questioning. Directly following the applicant and situational 
antecedents to asking questions in pre-questioning is the applicant’s actual extent of 
inquiry in the applicant questioning part of the model, which in turn may impact the 
interviewer’s perceptions of the applicant in the post-questioning section. However, the 
questioning portion also contains a number of moderating variables with the potential to 
influence the relationship between extent of inquiry and interviewer attributions about the 
applicant. These moderators fall under the broad categories of question characteristics, 
applicant characteristics, interviewer characteristics, and interview characteristics. 
Question characteristics. Provided mainstream interviewing books are correct, 
not all applicant questions are created equal. In other words, it is not merely the asking of 
questions alone driving interview outcomes, but rather the interplay between the number 
of questions asked and question characteristics. There are many question characteristics 
with the potential to influence the relationship between extent of inquiry and 
interviewer’s attributions of the applicant, including question content, structure, length 
(i.e., number of words in a question), clarity, verbal style, the combination of questions 
asked, when during the interview the question is asked, and even whether or not the 
question was solicited. Past research has sparingly examined the effects of question 
content, length, and certain elements of question structure (Babbitt & Jablin, 1985; 
Taylor et al., 2010; Taylor, Friedman, & Coolsen, 2013). As previously discussed, 
applicants benefit most from asking for job related information that cannot be learned 
from other sources. That is, questions seeking new information about the job and 
organization were found to lead to the most favorable evaluations, while questions about 
the process, information that could be found on the company website, and those questions 
---PAGE 27---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 26 
irrelevant to the job lead to more negative evaluations of the applicant (Babbitt & Jablin, 
1985; Taylor et al., 2010). More recently, when comparing various types of question 
content, applicant questions about the job were found to elicit statistically significantly 
better ratings than questions about pay or asking no questions at all (Taylor, Friedman, & 
Coolsen, 2013). Other studies have also shown questions about the job to be important; 
when judges in an interview training workshop were asked to rate the importance of 
twelve applicant behaviors, they rated applicants’ questions about the job and work 
conditions as the third most important factor in influencing the decisions made by 
recruiters (Barbee & Keil, 1973). Although the average number of words in a question 
did not change between those who got second interview offers and those who did not 
(Babbitt & Jablin, 1985), more research should be done to determine if there is any point 
at which question length begins to affect the ratings made about applicants. In terms of 
question structure, only phrasing (e.g., first person, second person, third person) and open 
versus closed questions have been previously examined (Babbitt & Jablin, 1985). 
However, it is possible that other elements of structure, such as tense (e.g., past, present, 
future) and whether the question is double barreled, could also impact the favorability 
with which the question is received. 
There are also a number of question characteristics that have not yet been 
examined, such as question clarity, the verbal style with which the questions are 
presented, and the combination of questions asked. In terms of question clarity, 
applicants who present the interviewer with clear, easily understood questions may be 
perceived as better communicators and as a result receive more favorable ratings. 
Communication skills have been rated as extremely important by interviewers in past 
---PAGE 28---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 27 
research; around 98% of personnel interviewers in one study claimed that oral and 
nonverbal communication skills statistically significantly impact hiring decisions 
(Peterson, 1997). These interviewers also identified response clarity as one of the five 
most prevalent communication deficiencies among interviewees. 
Similarly, paralinguistic characteristics (listed as verbal communication style in 
Figure 1), including speech rate, tone, pitch, articulation, fluency, and pauses may serve 
as verbal cues that impact interviewer reactions to applicant questions. Certain applicant 
verbal cues were related to interview ratings (Barrick, Shaffer, & DeGrassi, 2009) by way 
of trust, liking, and attributed credibility of the applicant (DeGroot & Motowildo, 1999). 
In another study, applicant fluency of speech (i.e., speaking spontaneously, using words 
well, and articulating thoughts clearly) was rated as the second most important factor 
(after appropriateness of content) in contributing to employment decisions 
(Hollandsworth, Kazelskis, Stevens, & Dressel, 1979). Thus, those questions meeting 
high paralinguistic standards should be perceived the most favorably by interviewers, and 
result in favorable attributions as well. 
The combination of questions asked may also impact interviewer evaluations of 
the applicant. Although some applicants ask only one question, in many cases applicants 
ask multiple questions during the course of the interview. It is important to recognize that 
questions do not necessarily occur in isolation, making it necessary to examine the 
combined effects of multiple questions on the attributions interviewers make and 
resulting hiring ratings. It is not unheard of for combined effects to differ in direction or 
magnitude than those of isolated behaviors. In the impression management literature, for 
instance, it has been found that the combination of ingratiation and self-focused 
---PAGE 29---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 28 
impression management tactics yielded higher interview ratings and action 
recommendations than either of the two tactics in isolation (Proost et al., 2010). Perhaps 
with applicant questions, a favorably perceived question, when paired with a negatively 
perceived question, could ameliorate some of the negative consequences of the negatively 
perceived question. Or, two questions that have positive effects in isolation may have 
additive effects when combined, resulting in even more positive attributions/ratings. The 
nature of the combined effect largely depends on the characteristics of the questions, 
including question content. 
Another moderator to consider is the point of the interview at which the question 
is asked; questions asked early in the interview may have different impacts than questions 
asked later. For example, initial impressions formed of the applicant during rapport 
building (i.e., small talk at the beginning of the interview often used to build trust and 
relax the applicant) have been found to relate to interview ratings and employment 
decisions (Barrick, Swider, & Stewart, 2010). If simply engaging the applicant in small 
talk about non-job-related information contributes to initial impressions of the applicant, 
it is likely, perhaps even more than likely, that initial impressions would also form if the 
applicant asked presumably job-related questions at the beginning of the interview. 
However, the larger issue is whether questions asked during the middle or at the end of 
the interview have the same impact on impression formations that early impressions do. 
A final potential question-based moderator is whether or not the questions were 
solicited. As mentioned previously, some CEO’s like Penelope Trunk recommend that 
applicants ask questions throughout the interview as they arise, because asking questions 
before prompting from the interviewer shows initiative (Fiegerman, 2011). She is not 
---PAGE 30---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 29 
alone in this opinion; in an analysis of the advice provided through interviewing 
handbooks, Babbitt (1985) found that 78% of books recommend that applicants ask 
questions as they come up in the interview instead of waiting for the interviewer to 
request questions from the applicant. Such a strategy, these books argue, is imperative in 
allowing the applicant to learn early on what characteristics or abilities the interviewer is 
looking for in an applicant. However, in Babbitt’s (1985) own data, he found that only 
one-third of interviewees asked questions before the interviewer expressed interest in 
hearing them. Furthermore, applicants who were successful in their interview (i.e., 
received a second interview offer), typically asked proportionally fewer unsolicited 
questions than those who were not asked to come back for a second interview, suggesting 
that it may be in applicants’ best interests to wait until the interviewer asks for questions 
contrary to the advice of some self-help books.  
Applicant Characteristics. Applicant characteristics also have the potential to 
change the nature of the relationship between applicant extent of inquiry and interviewer 
attributions about the applicant, including the applicant’s nonverbal behavior and 
perceived confidence of the applicant when asking the questions. Information about 
applicant confidence may even be interpreted from nonverbal behaviors. The previously 
discussed nonverbal paralinguistic characteristics, such as variations in speech fluency, 
communicate speaker confidence and other affective states (Scherer & Giles, 1979; 
Scherer, London, & Wolfe, 1973). Vocal loudness, decreased response latencies in 
responding, and increased voice modulation are also indicators of confidence (Kimble & 
Seidel, 1991; McGovern, 1978). Additionally, McGovern (1978) found that other 
nonverbal behaviors (i.e., increased eye contact and high energy levels) were related to 
---PAGE 31---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 30 
the perceived self-confidence interviewers attributed to applicants. Increased eye contact 
was also related to a medley of attributions about the applicant, including, alertness, 
assertiveness, dependability, responsibility, and initiative (Amalfitano & Kalt, 1977). 
Thus, it is possible that nonverbal behavior conveying confidence accompanying 
applicant questions could influence the relationship between extent of inquiry and various 
attributions. 
Not only are nonverbal cues related to perceived confidence of the applicant, but 
they are also related to interviewer assessments of applicants and interview outcomes 
(Edinger & Patterson, 1983; Forbes & Jackson, 1980; Goldberg & Cohen, 2004; Hosada, 
Stone-Romero, & Coats, 2003; Washburn & Hakel, 1973; Young & Beier, 1977). 
Interviewers viewing an applicant with positive nonverbal behaviors were far more likely 
to recommend they be given a second interview than applicants with negative nonverbal 
behaviors (McGovern, 1978). Furthermore, composites of both vocal cues (pitch, pitch 
variability, speech rate, pauses, and amplitude variability) and visual cues (physical 
attractiveness, smiling, gaze, hand movement, and body orientation) were related to 
interviewers’ ratings by way of increased liking, trust, and credibility (DeGroot & 
Motowildo, 1999). Another study to find that nonverbal behaviors influenced liking for 
the candidate also found both overall and gender-based effects (Levine & Feldman, 
2002). Both male and female applicants were better liked when they smiled during the 
interview; the effects of eye contact and posture, on the other hand, depended on 
applicant gender. For female applicants, less eye contact and more erect postures yielded 
lower perceptions of liking, while women whose postures were more relaxed were better 
liked by interviewers. Male applicants, on the other hand, were liked less by interviewers 
---PAGE 32---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 31 
when they maintained high levels of eye contact (Levine & Feldman, 2002). As some of 
the above studies suggest, it is likely that the nonverbal behaviors of applicants affect 
interview performance through the attributions made about the applicants. As such, 
nonverbal behavior can either enhance or detract from the message of the applicant’s 
questions to affect interviewer attributions. 
Interviewer characteristics. While the applicant has some control over how well 
or poorly questions are received, on the other side of the desk interviewer characteristics 
are also likely to affect the relationship between applicant extent of inquiry and 
attributions about the applicant. The moderators fitting into this category include 
interviewer perceptions of question appropriateness and perceptions of similarity between 
the interviewer and applicant. Also included is interviewer experience conducting 
interviews, expectations for being asked questions (including difficult questions), 
position/role/department of the interviewer, and evaluation of the applicant at the time 
questions are asked.  
Interviewer perceptions. The interviewer’s perceptions of question 
appropriateness are expected to affect the relationship between extent of inquiry and 
evaluations of the applicant. Appropriateness pertains to both the presence of questions as 
well as question content. As previously noted, the appropriateness of the content in 
applicants’ answers to interview questions was rated as the most important factor in 
contributing to employment decisions (Hollandsworth, et al., 1979). It seems plausible 
that the appropriateness of content should extend beyond the applicant’s answering of 
questions to the applicant’s asking of questions as well. One element contributing to 
perceptions of question appropriateness is whether the interviewer believes the question 
---PAGE 33---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 32 
could have, and perhaps should have, been researched and answered by the applicant 
prior to the interview. Whether or not the question could have been answered before the 
interview should have the greatest impacts upon the perceived motivation and preparation 
of the applicant, as well as their perceived knowledgeableness about the organization. For 
instance, if the applicant’s question pertains to information readily available via the 
company website or other easily accessible sources, the applicant’s lack of knowledge 
about the organization will be highlighted and the interviewer may furthermore perceive 
that the applicant has not adequately prepared. Those who are knowledgeable about the 
organization and the work they will be doing may be more desirable to organizations 
because these individuals likely have more realistic expectations about what working for 
the company would be like, and thus should be better fitting due to self-selection, more 
committed, and better equipped to deal with job demands (Breaugh, 2012).  
Another interviewer perception that may affect the relationship between the extent 
of inquiry and interview outcomes is the perceived similarity between the applicant and 
interviewer, provided that the applicant’s questions communicate these similarities and 
the interviewer is perceptive of them. Perceptions of similarity have been found to relate 
to interview ratings (Barrick, Swider, & Stewart, 2010). This effect may operate as a 
result of liking or interpersonal attraction to similar others. The similarity-attraction 
paradigm (Byrne, 1971) proposes that individuals are attracted to and like others that are 
similar to them, resulting in more favorable assessments of the other (Byrne, 1971). One 
explanation for this effect is that similarities serve to validate or reinforce individuals’ 
personal opinions and characteristics, leading to positive affective reactions (Byrne, 
1971). Byrne’s similarity-attraction paradigm has been supported for demographic 
---PAGE 34---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 33 
similarities such as race (Goldberg, 2005; Lin, Dobbins, & Farr, 1992; O’Leary, Durham, 
Weathington, Cothran, Cunningham, 1995), and attitudinal similarities (Baskett, 1973; 
Griffitt & Jackson, 1970; Peters & Terborg, 1975). While this effect is affect-based, 
another relevant similarity model, Dalessio and Imada’s (1984) ideal employee model, is 
competence-based. In their model, interviewers that feel they possess the competencies 
required of an ideal employee for the position compare the applicant to the interviewer’s 
own personal characteristics. If the applicant seems to possess similar traits to the 
interviewer, then the interviewer perceives the applicant as qualified for the position 
based on their mutually shared competencies (Dalessio & Imada 1984). It is possible that 
perceived similarity may result in increases in both affect and the perceived competence 
of the applicant. For instance, one study found that similarity was highly related to affect 
and competence, and both affect and competence were related to perceptions of job 
suitability, although affect accounted for slightly more variance (Howard & Ferris, 1996). 
It may be that the type of similarity also determines whether perceived similarity results 
in liking, perceptions of competence, or both. For example, the relationship between 
interviewer-applicant similarity on conscientiousness and interview ratings was mediated 
by the interviewer’s perceptions of competence, but not by an affective response to the 
applicant (Sears & Rowe, 2003). Quite a few interviewing handbooks recommend asking 
for the interviewer’s personal opinion on some job related topic because allowing the 
interviewer to talk about himself or herself insinuates that the applicant values the 
interviewer’s opinion and may believe they share the same values (Figler, 1980; Medley, 
1978; Merman & McLaughlin, 1983). 
---PAGE 35---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 34 
Other interviewer characteristics. Interviewer experience (i.e., the amount of 
experience an individual has conducting interviews), expectations for being asked 
questions (and/or difficult questions), and the evaluation of the applicant at the time 
questions are asked, are expected to shape how comfortable an interviewer is with 
applicant questions. Any individual who has interviewed for a position or conducted an 
interview should have an idea of the various elements, or stages, of an interview. Tullar 
(1989) identified these four stages (i.e., scenes), as: (1) greetings/rapport building, (2) the 
interviewer asking the applicant questions, (3) the applicant asking the interviewer 
questions, and (4) finally disengagement. Tullar, however, did not describe the 
expectations interviewers might have within each of the scenes. For instance, do 
interviewers expect the applicant to ask questions freely, or keep questions to themselves 
until prompted? Do interviewers expect a few easily answered generic questions, or 
unique, insightful, or even difficult questions? Most importantly, how do individuals who 
violate interviewer expectations by asking or not asking questions fare?  
Expectancy violations theory seems to suggest that having experience conducting 
interviews will affect interview outcomes by building an expectation that applicants will 
(or will not) ask questions. That is, if interviewers encounter more applicants who ask 
questions than those who do not (or vice versa), they may come to expect similar 
behavior from other applicants. This may change as a function of the type of applicant or 
applicant demographics as well. For instance, interviewers may perceive that applicants 
of a certain group, such as new college graduates, are less likely to ask questions and 
applicants with more job experience are more likely to ask questions, and thus expect 
different behaviors from these two groups. According to Burgoon, Stern, and Dillman 
---PAGE 36---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 35 
(1995), when a violation of expectations occurs, if the behavior is considered more 
positive than the expected behavior, this behavior is evaluated more positively. When the 
actual behavior, on the other hand, is considered to be more negative than the expected 
behavior, this discrepancy results in more negative evaluations. Thus, asking questions 
when they are not expected or not asking questions when they are expected should result 
in more negative evaluations provided the interviewer perceives the violating behavior to 
be more negatively valenced than the expectations. While such a violation may not be as 
stark to those who have less experience conducting interviews (because they may not 
have yet had the chance to develop firm expectancies regarding whether the applicant 
will have questions), it should be more salient to the interviewers with greater 
interviewing experience.  
Other variables that may alter interviewer expectations for being asked questions 
(or being asked specific types of question) and consequent reactions are the interviewer’s 
position and department within the organization. For instance, a recruiter from the HR 
department, depending on his or her familiarity with the position, might expect to be 
asked certain types of questions more geared toward the process or the organization in 
lieu of questions specific to the job, boss, or team that could be better answered by 
someone working in the department with the job vacancy. To the extent that recruiters 
engage in a greater frequency of job interviews than hiring managers throughout the 
organization, their expectations for the types and numbers of questions they will be asked 
may be more concrete than hiring managers who occasionally engage in a job interview. 
Finally, the interviewer’s evaluation of the applicant at the time questions are 
asked may also affect the relationship between applicant questioning behaviors and 
---PAGE 37---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 36 
attributions/evaluations of the applicant. According to confirmation bias, individuals 
favor information that falls in line with their previous opinions, beliefs, or expectations 
(Nickerson, 1998). This effect carries over into information gathering as well; that is, 
interviewers asked more negative questions during job interviews when their pre-
interview impressions from the applicant’s résumé created the impression of poor 
qualifications (Macan & Dipboye, 1988). Similarly then, any positive or negative 
evaluations the interviewer has of the applicant at the time at which the applicant asks a 
question may lead the interviewer to interpret the question in a way that confirms their 
current evaluation of the applicant.  
Interview characteristics. The final category of moderators in the proposed 
process model of applicant questioning behaviors involves those aspects of the interview 
that may affect applicant questioning behavior. This category includes interview 
structure, the purpose of the interview, and the interview’s temporal placement in the 
overall selection process.  
The first interview characteristic with the potential to moderate the relationship 
between extent of inquiry and the attributions made about the applicant is the degree of 
interview structure. In the event that interviews are structured in regard to not allowing 
applicant questions, applicant questions may not be perceived very positively, especially 
if applicants were made aware at the beginning of the interview that questions should not 
be asked. However, during less structured interviews of more conversational nature, 
increases in extent of inquiry may be welcomed or even encouraged throughout the 
interview. 
---PAGE 38---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 37 
The final interview variables that might affect the relationship between applicant 
extent of inquiry and evaluations of the applicant are the type/purpose of the interview 
being conducted and the stage in the selection process during which the interview is 
conducted. As Taylor and colleagues (2010) warn in the limitations of their study, the 
type of interview should be taken into consideration when estimating the impact of 
certain types of questions on ratings of the applicant. The mere presence of questions 
may be received differently in a screening interview than in second or third interviews, 
after the organization has expressed their interest in the applicant. Similarly, question 
content is also subject to variable effects depending on the type of interview or stage in 
the selection process. Questions about salary and benefits may elicit more favorable 
reactions when they occur later in the selection process rather than early in the process 
during a screening interview (Taylor et al., 2010) 
Post-questioning. The final part of the process model of applicant questioning 
behaviors in Figure 1 is post-questioning. This section is comprised of the various 
outcomes resulting from the effects of extent of inquiry and moderating variables. 
Potential outcomes include the attributions made about the applicant (e.g., inferences 
about the applicant’s P-O fit, extraversion, openness to experience, conscientiousness, 
motivation, knowledge of the organization, interest in the job, preparation, and cognitive 
ability). However, the process model does not conclude with attributions – after they are 
made, interviewers may display verbal or nonverbal behaviors which act as feedback to 
the applicant, likely playing a role in whether the applicant decides to ask more questions. 
This feedback loop may continue until the applicant decides to stop asking questions. A 
---PAGE 39---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 38 
final outcome influenced by the attributions the interviewer makes about the applicant is 
the interview or hiring ratings given to the applicant.  
The relationship between attributions and ratings. Research supports the notion 
that interviewer attributions about applicants are related to interview outcomes. Research 
has found that interviewers make perceptions of applicant fit with the job and 
organization during the interview, and that these perceptions also contribute to hiring 
recommendations (Kristof-Brown, 2006).  
Not only are interviewers concerned with assessing the fit of the applicant, 
researchers have suggested that interviewers also use the interview to make assessments 
of the applicant’s personality (Anderson, 1992; Fletcher, 1990). This is not really a 
stretch, considering that personality has been inferred from other selection methods, such 
as biodata (Bretz, Rynes, & Gerhart, 1993; Brown & Campion, 1994), and that recruiters 
have been found to take into account attributions about applicant personality (i.e., 
conscientiousness and extraversion) from biodata when forming opinions regarding 
applicant employability (Cole, Field, Giles, & Harris, 2004). Typically, individuals are 
fairly adept at making personality inferences in short periods of time (Funder & West, 
1993), often doing so automatically (Newman & Uleman, 1989). However, certain 
personality traits, such as extraversion, more readily lend themselves to being reliably 
perceived because of the easily identified behaviors extraverts demonstrate in social 
situations. Interviewer ratings of applicant personality have been found to be statistically 
significantly related to applicant’s self-ratings of personality (Barrick, Patton, & 
Haugland, 2000). While many studies have shown that the personality characteristics of 
individuals were related to interview outcomes such as job offers and second interview 
---PAGE 40---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 39 
offers (Anderson, Silvester, Cunningham-Snell, & Haddleton, 1999; Caldwell & Burger, 
1998; Cook, Vance, & Spektor, 2000), not many studies have addressed whether 
perceptions of personality also influence ratings of the applicant. The study that comes 
closest to addressing the impact of perceptions of personality is a study by Dunn, Mount, 
Barrick, and Ones (1995) which showed that when interviewers were asked to use 
personality information from applicants to make hiring decisions for a variety of jobs, 
overall conscientiousness was most highly related to favorable hiring ratings across job 
types. However, the extent to which personality traits were related to hiring ratings 
differed somewhat depending on the job (Dunn et al., 1995). Provided that applicants are 
able to infer applicants’ conscientiousness, extraversion, and openness from the content 
or mere presence of applicant-generated questions, it seems plausible that these 
perceptions of personality could contribute to some of the variance in hiring ratings.  
Motivation may also relate to hiring ratings. Type A achievement strivings, 
characterized by competence, aggressiveness, and motivation to succeed, were found to 
be related to positive interview outcomes (Cook et al., 2000). In another study, 
perceptions of applicant motivation were highly correlated with the rated hirability of the 
applicant (Gifford, Ng, & Wilkinson, 1985). 
Applicant knowledge of the job or organization is another likely contributor to 
favorable hiring ratings. The reverse has been supported by research; that is, interviewers 
who are more knowledgeable about the job received more favorable evaluations from 
applicants (Schmitt & Coyle, 1976). This relationship might be even stronger for the 
reverse, (i.e., if the applicant is knowledgeable about the job or organization) because 
applicants may not be expected to be as well informed about the organization or job as 
---PAGE 41---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 40 
the interviewer because in most cases they have probably not worked for the 
organization. Thus, if they are knowledgeable, it demonstrates to the interviewer that the 
applicant took the extra effort to learn more about the company and job before arriving at 
the interview.  
Interest in the job might also be related to hiring ratings. Although the 
relationships between the perceived interest/curiosity of the applicant and interview 
outcomes have not been empirically examined, plenty of authors and job-search websites 
giving advice to applicants suggest that when all other qualifications are equal, showing 
interest in the job and organization, in other words, demonstrating that the applicant 
really wants the job, will likely give that applicant the advantage (Kador, 2010). Both 
trait and state curiosity, however, are related to job performance via increased learning 
through socialization (Reio Jr. & Wiswell, 2000). Thus, interviewers that identify interest 
among job applicants may give these applicants higher ratings due to beliefs about 
enhanced future job performance. 
Perceptions of interviewee preparation additionally have the potential to enhance 
hiring ratings. Using social sources such as talking with others in preparation for 
employment interviews was related to both the number of follow-up interviews and job 
offers applicants received (Caldwell & Burger, 1998). Considering the supported 
relationship between actual preparation and interview outcomes, there is also a strong 
possibility that the perception of preparation will be related to hiring ratings as well. 
Cognitive ability is yet another variable that has been linked to positive interview 
performance (Berry, Sackett, & Landers, 2007; Campion, Pursell, & Brown, 1988; 
Huffcutt, Roth, & McDaniel 1996), and research evidence supports that interview ratings 
---PAGE 42---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 41 
may be a reflection, at least partially, of cognitive ability (Berry et al., 2007; Huffcutt et 
al., 1996). Given the relationship between cognitive ability and job performance (Chen, 
Casper, & Cortina, 2001; Schmidt, 2011), it is not surprising that interviewers may factor 
perceptions of applicant cognitive ability into their ratings, even if they are no aware they 
are doing so. Consequently, it is possible that perceived cognitive ability of applicants 
may contribute to the hiring ratings made about applicants. 
Model summary. The previously discussed model of the applicant questioning 
process presents antecedents and effects of applicant extent of inquiry, as well as 
moderating variables that may affect the relationship between applicant extent of inquiry 
and outcomes. The intent of this model is to highlight the major variables involved in the 
process; it is by no means exhaustive of every variable that may influence the decision to 
ask questions or the relationship between extent of inquiry and outcomes.  
Study 1 
The proposed process model provides a good basis for conceptually organizing 
the various variables involved in applicant questioning behaviors. The scope of the 
current study, however, is to test empirically a few elements of the model; that is, to test 
the effects of (1) whether the information to answer the question was available to the 
applicant prior to the interview, (2) interviewer beliefs about whether applicants should 
ask questions, and (3) the overall impact of applicant questions on hiring ratings 
depending on applicant qualifications (i.e., How much damage does asking no questions 
or negatively perceived questions do to a qualified applicant? How much benefit is there 
to be gained from asking positively perceived questions for marginally qualified 
applicants?).  
---PAGE 43---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 42 
For this study, all applicant questions centered on the job, given that prior 
research found that questions about the job often yielded statistically significantly higher 
ratings than other content (e.g., salary and benefits) or no questions at all (Taylor, 
Friedman, & Coolsen, 2013). Yet, researchers need to be careful not to overgeneralize, as 
questions about the job can vary widely in their degree of positivity or negativity. That is, 
questions can range considerably within each content area, some more positive in nature 
than others. Additionally, there are other determinants affecting the relative quality of a 
question apart from content alone. So, the real question then becomes, what else makes a 
question “good” or “bad”? This study focused on three key characteristics likely to shape 
how well applicant questions are received, the first being whether the answer to the 
applicant questions was available via a readily accessible medium such as the company 
website. There is some evidence suggesting that applicants asking about something they 
should already know will negatively impact ratings. For instance, after finding that 
questions about the company’s history, revenue, and products were perceived as likely 
having a negative effect on interview ratings, Taylor, Coolsen, and Reese (2010) 
concluded that questions that could have been answered in advance were likely to be not 
well received in an interview. Yet, this conclusion had not been previously tested 
directly. 
Given that applicant decisions about what to ask alone cannot determine how 
positively or negatively a question is perceived, another likely determinant of the 
reception to applicant questions is the interviewer. After all, the interviewer plays a 
crucial role in the interaction, considering that he or she is on the receiving end of the 
questions and ultimately the one evaluating the applicant. Thus, it is important to capture 
---PAGE 44---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 43 
characteristics of interviewers that may affect their reactions to questions. Whether or not 
the interviewer believes that applicants should ask questions will help capture both sides 
of the employment interview: the applicant and the interviewer. There are three ways 
interviewers can be described on this variable: (1) They believe that applicants should ask 
questions, (2) they believe that applicants should not ask questions, (3) or they do not feel 
that an applicant should or should not ask questions (i.e., they are open to questions, but 
do not have an opinion either way). In the latter option, the interviewer likely is open to 
hearing applicant questions, but is unlikely to think negatively of the applicant for not 
asking any. 
The third characteristic likely to impact how favorably questions (or no questions) 
are perceived is the applicant’s qualifications. Some research has shown that those more 
favorable applicants do not necessarily suffer negative consequences to the same degree 
as less favorable applicants do. After initial impressions were formed of job applicants, 
minor embellishments discovered on résumés did not affect the ratings of more desirable 
applicants, but had a negative effect on the final ratings of less desirable applicants 
(Kuhn, Johnson, & Miller, 2013). A similar effect may occur when it comes to applicant 
questions, such that the ratings of applicants not asking questions or asking questions that 
are answered on the organization’s website may be lower compared to those who ask 
questions not answered on the website for marginally qualified, but not well qualified 
applicants. In other words, the consequences of asking about something the applicant 
should have researched ahead of time or not asking questions may be much greater for 
marginally qualified applicants than those who are well qualified. 
---PAGE 45---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 44 
Finally, to help explain why applicant questions may affect hiring ratings, this 
study will also examine the differences in the types of attributions interviewers make 
about the applicant depending on applicant questions interviewer beliefs about applicants 
questioning. Although Taylor, Friedman, & Coolsen (2013) found differences in 
perceptions of extraversion and openness based on whether applicants asked questions, 
this study will explore additional applicant perceptions beyond personality to include 
perceived P-O fit, motivation, interest in the job, and preparation. 
As mentioned previously, the relationships examined in this study correspond to paths 
in the process model of applicant questioning behaviors, as indicated below. Although 
specific parts of the model are of interest, the process model as a whole will not be tested 
in its entirety. The main points of interest include: 
1. The effect of applicant questions (i.e., whether the applicant asks no questions, 
asks questions that can be answered on the website, or asks questions that cannot 
be answered on the website) on attributions made about the applicant.  
 
2. The difference in the effect of applicant questions on P-O fit depending on 
interviewer beliefs about whether the applicant should ask questions. 
 
3. The relationship between attributions made about the applicant and hiring ratings. 
 
4. The difference in the effect of applicant questions on hiring ratings depending on 
applicant qualifications (i.e., résumé qualifications and interview performance).  
 
The first area of interest, when related to the model, involves a combination of the 
extent of inquiry variable with the question characteristic: “availability of the answer to 
the question prior to the interview” in the applicant questioning segment to affect the 
perceived attributions of applicants in the post-questioning section. Although in the 
model extent of inquiry involves the number of questions asked, including no questions, 
in this study that variable will be limited to does not ask questions or asks questions. 
---PAGE 46---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 45 
When combined with the “availability of the answer to the question” variable, the levels 
of applicant questions become: asks questions that can be answered on the website, asks 
questions that cannot be answered on the website, and asks no questions. The second area 
of interest involves the previously discussed variables, but also includes the interviewer 
characteristic: “expectation for questions.” Again, this factor in the present study has 
three levels: expects questions, expects no questions, and does not expect one or the other 
(no opinion either way). The third area of interest involves the path between interviewer 
attributions about the applicant and hiring ratings. The fourth area of interest involves the 
path between applicant questions (in the model, “extent of inquiry” combined with 
“availability of the answer to the question prior to the interview”) and perceived 
attributions, but also includes the interacting applicant characteristic “perceived 
qualifications of the applicant.”  
The following sections address the hypothesized interactions between the 
variables of interest on each individual attribution of the applicant, starting with 
perceptions of the applicant’s P-O fit. Then, the relationships between the various 
attributions and hiring ratings are discussed. 
Perceived person-organization fit. Perceptions of person-job fit are often 
contingent upon whether the perceived knowledge, skills, and abilities of applicants align 
with what is required by the job (Kristof-Brown, 2006). Person-organization fit, on the 
other hand, is more often judged by the perceived values and personality traits of 
applicants (Kristof-Brown, 2006). Interviewers have been found to make attributions of 
both applicant P-J and P-O fit based on employment interview performance (Kristof-
Brown, 2006). While interviewers’ questions to applicants are designed to get at the 
---PAGE 47---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 46 
KSAs pertinent to perceptions of P-J fit, the questions applicants choose to ask may help 
interviewers determine P-O fit by serving as a reflection of applicant values and 
personality. In other words, because applicants are able to ask about whatever they want, 
interviewers may interpret applicant questions about the job as an indication that the 
applicant values the job, and thus would be a good fit. After all, most organizations want 
employees that are interested in their work and committed to their job, rather than those 
who show up just for the paycheck. 
 The role of interviewer expectations. Interviewer expectations for questions 
should play a role in whether extent of inquiry is positively or negatively related to the 
perceived P-O fit of the applicant. This is because by asking (or neglecting to ask) 
questions, the applicant is essentially either doing or not doing what individuals at the 
organization are expected to do. Interviewer expectations, after all, are likely shaped by 
organizational norms and values. Thus, if an interviewer expects questions, when an 
applicant confirms those expectations by asking questions, then perceptions of P-O fit 
should be greater. If an interviewer expects the applicant to not ask any questions, then an 
applicant who does so should not be perceived as positively by essentially failing to “fit” 
with what is expected.  
 The role of whether questions were answered on the company website. When the 
interviewer does not feel strongly either way that an applicant should or should not ask 
questions, applicant fit will likely instead be determined by whether or not the answers to 
the applicant’s questions are on the company website. For instance, most organizations 
are likely to value hard work and preparation, and want the employee they select for the 
position to want the job as much as the company wants the chosen person to accept their 
---PAGE 48---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 47 
offer. By asking questions that could have been answered in advance with a bit of 
preparation, it may signal that the applicant does not value the same hard work, 
preparation, and appreciation for the organization and job to the same extent as the 
organization. Thus, in these situations the applicant who asks questions that can be 
answered on the website should be perceived as having lower P-O fit than those asking 
questions not answered on the website. 
 
Hypothesis 1: There will be an interaction between applicant questions and 
interviewer expectations about applicant questions: The relationship between 
applicant questions and perceptions of applicants’ P-O fit will depend upon 
whether participants believe that applicants should ask questions, believe that 
they should not ask questions, or do not feel strongly either way, but are still open 
to hearing questions. 
Hypothesis 1a: When participants believe that applicants should ask 
questions, applicants who ask questions (both those that can be answered 
on the website and those that cannot be answered on the website) will be 
perceived as having higher P-O fit than those who do not ask questions. 
No difference is expected between those who ask questions that can be 
answered on the website and those who ask questions that cannot be 
answered on the website. 
Hypothesis 1b: When participants believe that applicants should not ask 
questions, applicants who ask questions (both those that can be answered 
on the website and those that cannot be answered on the website) will be 
perceived as having lower P-O fit than those who do not ask questions. No 
difference is expected between those who ask questions that can be 
answered on the website and those who ask questions that cannot be 
answered on the website. 
Hypothesis 1c: When participants are open to questions but have no 
opinion on whether they should be asked, applicants who ask questions 
that can be answered on the website will be perceived as having lower P-
O fit than applicants who do not ask any questions and applicants who ask 
questions that cannot be answered on the website. No difference is 
expected between those who ask questions that cannot be answered on the 
website and those who do not ask questions. 
---PAGE 49---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 48 
 
Personality. Whether the applicant decides to ask questions or not should relate to 
attributions about the Big Five personality traits extraversion, conscientiousness, and 
openness to experience, because these characteristics all relate to comfort with 
communication and/or information gathering in some form. Specifically, extraverted 
individuals tend to be more initiating of social interaction, conscientious individuals are 
typically well-prepared, thorough, and attentive to details, and those who are open to 
experience tend to gather more information than individuals low on these respective traits 
(Costa & McCrae, 1988). Considering that asking questions prolongs social interaction, 
and demonstrates an attempt to learn more about some aspect of the job or organization, 
the mere presence of any type of applicant questions may be considered emblematic of 
extraversion and/or openness, even if the questions were answered on the website. Past 
research supports this relationship, as applicants who asked questions were perceived as 
more extraverted and open to experience than those who asked no questions (Taylor, 
Friedman, & Coolsen, 2013). 
The role of whether questions were answered on the company website. While any 
applicant questions regardless of whether they are answered on the company’s website 
may demonstrate extraversion or openness, perceptions of conscientiousness are likely to 
depend on question quality. Thus, one would be more likely to find a relationship 
between asking questions and conscientiousness when differentiating questions of high 
quality from poorer quality. Following on this logic, some less well-researched questions 
seem liable to elicit lesser conscientiousness ratings than others. For instance, 
conscientious individuals, being detail-oriented (Costa & McCrae, 1988), are likely to do 
their research on the company before they interview. More careful, they should likely be 
---PAGE 50---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 49 
mindful not to say anything that could convey a lack of research. Thus, applicants asking 
novel questions not answered on the company website should be perceived as more 
conscientiousness than applicants who ask questions that are answered on the company 
website and applicants who don’t ask any questions at all. 
Hypothesis 2: Applicants who ask questions will be perceived as more extraverted 
than applicants who do not ask questions. No difference is expected between those 
who ask questions that can be answered on the website and those who ask 
questions that cannot be answered on the website. 
 
Hypothesis 3: Applicants who ask questions will be perceived as more open to 
experience than applicants who do not ask questions. No difference is expected 
between those who ask questions that can be answered on the website and those 
who ask questions that cannot be answered on the website. 
 
Hypothesis 4: Applicants who ask questions that cannot be answered on the 
website will be perceived as more conscientious than applicants who ask 
questions that can be answered on the website and applicants who do not ask any 
questions.  
 
 
 Motivation. Motivated individuals typically are more effortful in reaching their 
goals, and spend more time pursuing them (Diefendorff & Chandler, 2010). While the act 
of asking questions means the applicant is spending more time pursuing the job by 
prolonging the amount of time spent in the interview, there are other variables that are 
perhaps more indicative of motivation than asking or not asking questions alone.  
The role of whether questions were answered on the company website. Whether 
the questions could have been answered prior to the interview may be a better indicator 
of motivation. Asking a question that could have been answered on the website should 
reveal to the interviewer that little effort was put into researching the company and the 
job, as well as planning for the interview and determining what questions to ask.  
Hypothesis 5: Applicants who ask questions that cannot be answered on the 
website will be perceived as more motivated than applicants who ask questions 
---PAGE 51---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 50 
that can be answered on the website and applicants who do not ask any questions. 
No difference is expected between those who ask questions that can be answered 
on the website and applicants who do not ask any questions. 
 
 Interest in the job. Curiosity and interest often have been treated interchangeably 
in the literature (Kashdan & Silva. 2009). However, Litman (2005) proposed that interest 
is actually a facet of curiosity, along with deprivation. That is, if curiosity is a desire to 
know information, then interest (seeking information out of interest) and deprivation 
(seeking information out of frustration at not knowing) are reasons for this desire. Still, 
the distinction between curiosity and interest is not agreed upon, and often the two 
constructs (if they are indeed distinct) are frequently related to the same outcomes. 
Interest has been found to relate to exploratory behaviors and prolonged task persistence 
in terms of the duration individuals listened to music (Crozier, 1974) and the duration for 
which they viewed a piece of artwork (Berlyne, 1974). Research has supported the 
positive relationship between student curiosity and student exploratory behaviors via 
questioning in classroom settings (Evans, 1971, Peters, 1978). Furthermore, curiosity is a 
key component of openness to experience, which is related to information gathering 
behaviors (McCrae & Costa, 1985). Thus, the link between interest/curiosity and 
exploratory, inquisitive behaviors lends credence to the hypothesis that interviewers may 
interpret applicant questions as signals of the applicant’s interest in the job.  
 The role of whether questions were answered on the company website. Although 
those who ask questions may at face value seem more interested in the job, whether the 
answers to questions were available ahead of time is perhaps more indicative of interest. 
That is, those applicant questions that are answered on the website likely convey less 
interest in the job than those that are not answered on the website, because the latter 
---PAGE 52---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 51 
shows that although the applicant seems interested at the moment, he or she was not 
interested enough to do some research on the company/job before coming to the 
interview. 
Hypothesis 6: Applicants who ask questions that cannot be answered on the 
website will be perceived as more interested in the job than applicants who ask 
questions that can be answered on the website, and these applicants will be 
perceived as more interested in the job than applicants who do not ask any 
questions.  
 
 
Preparation. Preparation, like interest and curiosity, has a strong research base in 
the education literature. Students’ preparation for class has been found to lead to 
increased participation by way of enhanced self-confidence (Fassinger, 1995; Neer, 1987; 
Neer & Kircher; 1989; Wade, 1994). Asking questions might be considered a form of 
increased participation, but again, this might not always be the case if answers to 
questions were easily accessible ahead of time.  
The role of whether questions were answered on the company website. 
Interviewers may deduce that applicants who ask questions not answered on the website 
spent time prior to the interview thinking about which questions to ask and reading up on 
the company, and thus prepared more thoroughly for the interview than those who do not 
ask questions or that ask questions answered on the website. This time, however, those 
who ask questions answered on the website will likely be perceived as less prepared than 
those asking no questions, because it could also be assumed that those asking no 
questions prepared so well that they do not have any, whereas asking something that 
should have been found out in advance shows an explicit lack of preparation. 
Hypothesis 7: Applicants who ask questions that cannot be answered on the 
website will be perceived as more prepared than applicants who don’t ask any 
questions and those who ask questions that can be answered on the website, and 
---PAGE 53---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 52 
applicants who don’t ask any questions will be perceived as more prepared than 
applicants who ask questions that can be answered on the website. 
 
 
The link between attributions and hiring ratings. As previously discussed 
during the explanation of the model, research supports the relationship between 
attributions about applicants and interview outcomes. Favorable hiring ratings have been 
linked to perceptions of applicant fit (Kristof-Brown, 2006), motivation to work, liking, 
and competence (Howard & Ferris, 1996; Sears & Rowe, 2003). Hiring ratings have also 
been shown to relate to personality traits (Anderson, Silvester, Cunningham-Snell, & 
Haddleton, 1999; Caldwell & Burger, 1998; Cook et al., 2000), and applicant preparation 
(Caldwell & Burger, 1998). Thus, provided interviewers perceive these traits, 
interviewers’ perceptions of applicants could very well lead to enhanced hiring ratings. 
The impact of knowledge regarding the job has been studied in relation to the 
interviewer; such that interviewers perceived to be well informed of the job elicited 
favorable ratings from applicants (Schmitt & Coyle, 1976). So long as interviewers have 
some expectation that the applicant should know basic facts about the job and 
organization, such knowledge might lead to enhanced ratings of the applicant as well.  
Hypothesis 8: Favorable interviewer attributions about the applicant (perceptions 
of:  
P-O fit, extraversion, conscientiousness, openness, motivation, interest in the job, 
and preparation) will relate positively to hiring ratings. 
 
Applicant qualifications, answer availability, and hiring ratings. It is possible 
that the effects of applicant questions not only depend on whether answers are available 
on the company website, but also on how well qualified the applicant is. We know from 
past research the power of first impressions (Barrick, Swider, & Stewart, 2010), and as 
previously discussed, negative information revealed later on during selection may not 
---PAGE 54---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 53 
have as negative an impact on the ratings of favorable applicants as it does on the ratings 
of less favorable applicants (Kuhn, Johnson, & Miller, 2013). To the extent that not 
asking questions is more negatively perceived than asking job-related questions 
consistent with what Taylor, Friedman, and Coolsen (2013) found, then perhaps the 
magnitude of this difference varies as a function of applicant qualifications. Taylor and 
colleagues found small, yet significant differences between asking questions about the 
job and not asking questions using well-qualified applicants. However, it may be that 
these differences are amplified in marginally qualified applicants, with those not asking 
questions receiving much worse ratings than applicants who ask job related questions not 
answered on the website than they would have had they been well-qualified applicants. 
The same logic applies when comparing those who ask questions not answered on the 
website to those who ask questions answered on the website for marginally and well-
qualified applicants, so long as asking questions answered on the website is perceived 
negatively. 
 
Hypothesis 9: There will be an interaction between applicant qualifications and 
applicant questions.  
Hypothesis 9a: For marginally qualified applicants, hiring ratings of 
those asking questions that cannot be answered on the website will be 
statistically significantly more positive than those asking questions that 
can be answered on the website and those asking no questions. No 
differences are expected between those asking questions that can be 
answered on the website and those asking no questions. 
Hypothesis 9b: For applicants who ask no questions and those who ask 
questions that can be answered on the website, applicants who are well 
qualified will receive statistically significantly more favorable ratings than 
applicants who are marginally qualified, whereas this effect will be 
diminished for those asking questions not answered on the website. 
---PAGE 55---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 54 
Study 1 Method 
Participants  
 The sample consisted of 289 psychology and business students from the 
University of Missouri-St. Louis. Students were required to be employed at least part 
time to participate. Participants ranged in age from 18 to 46 years (M = 22.97, SD = 
4.89), with 71% being female. The racial composition was 69% Caucasian, 17% African 
American, 3% Asian, 3% Hispanic, and 8% other ethnic backgrounds. Fifty-one 
participants were deleted due to failing the manipulation check that inquired whether the 
applicant asked the interviewer questions at any time during the interview, resulting in a 
total sample size of 238 participants. All conditions were represented among the deleted 
participants, and there did not appear to be any pattern for failing the manipulation check 
items (see Table 1). All participants received research credit for their participation in this 
study. 
Design 
Participants were randomly assigned to one condition in a 2 (Applicant questions: 
did not ask questions, asked questions) x 2 (Information availability: more information on 
the website, less information on the website) x 2 (Applicant résumé qualifications: well 
qualified, marginally qualified) fully crossed factorial design for a total of 8 conditions. 
See Table 2 for conditions and sample sizes. Another independent variable, interviewer 
beliefs about asking questions, was measured rather than manipulated.  
 
 
 
---PAGE 56---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 55 
Materials 
The company website (i.e., “About Us” page). The company’s “About Us” page 
gave a brief description of the benefits to working at the company to help create realism 
for the study. See the company “About Us” page in Appendix A. 
Job description. Following the “About Us” page was the description of the 
management trainee program at the organization. The description included information 
regarding typical tasks performed and KSAs necessary to successfully perform the job in 
question. The description was divided into an overview of the program timeline, basic 
qualifications, and compensation information. The job description was also used to 
manipulate information availability, which in the case of applicants who asked questions, 
determined whether the questions were answered on the website. The questions asked by 
the applicant remained the same in all conditions, but the program description varied 
based on condition. To create the condition where the applicant asked questions answered 
on the website, the webpage to which participants were directed provided more 
information explicitly answering the questions that the applicant asked. In the condition 
where the applicant asked questions that could not have been answered on the website, 
the questions remained the same but the webpage to which participants were directed 
provided less information, omitting information relevant to the questions the applicant 
asked. While different outcomes were expected depending on amount of information 
available on the website when applicants asked questions, no differences were expected 
when applicants did not, which is why hypotheses combined these conditions into a “no 
questions” group. To explore all possibilities, however, differences were examined based 
on the amount of information on the website when applicants did not ask questions for all 
---PAGE 57---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 56 
dependent variables to ensure it was appropriate to collapse across “no questions” groups. 
The two versions of the program description are in Appendix A. 
The two versions of the job description (i.e., more information and less 
information) were part of the manipulation. It was important that the participants paid 
attention to the program description deeply enough that they were able to remember the 
information included if the applicant asked questions about the job. To help with 
retention and aid in comprehension, participants were asked to fill out four open ended 
reflection questions about the company regarding (1) the importance of teamwork, (2) 
choosing focus areas, (3) promotions, and (4) the most appealing benefits to working for 
the organization (Appendix A). These are the areas about which applicants asked 
questions in the conditions where applicants asked questions. To further reinforce the 
manipulation, participants were then asked to take a quiz about what they read (Appendix 
B). Once participants finished the quiz, they were immediately shown their score and the 
correct answer was reiterated. Like the reflection questions, the quiz included questions 
directly related to what the applicants would be asking later in the interview, and was 
designed to distinguish between information that was included or not included in the 
program description. For instance, one question, “How many people are hired each year 
into the Management Trainee Program?” had answer choices (a) 10-20 or (b) This was 
not shared in the program description. If, during the interview, the applicant asked 
questions about the number of people who will be hired, the answer choices were 
intended to make it more apparent that the answer could be found or not found in the 
program description had the applicant explored the website and read the program 
description. Immediately after the quiz results, a final recap page was shown with key 
---PAGE 58---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 57 
details from the program description, with the most important information bolded and 
highlighted (Appendix B). 
Résumé. Participants were also directed to read each applicant’s résumé 
following the program description and quiz. Although the name at the top of the résumé 
stayed the same between conditions, the résumés were altered to create a well-qualified 
version and a marginally qualified version. Pilot tests showed evidence that the qualified 
résumé (M = 5.53 on a 1-6 scale, SD = .51) was perceived as more qualified than the 
marginal résumé (M = 3.88, SD = .50), t (9) = 5.38, p < .001, d = 3.25. See the résumés 
in Appendix C. 
Interview Recordings. Two video-recorded interviews were created for this 
research: one for the qualified conditions and one for the marginally qualified conditions. 
In Study 1, only the qualified version of the interview was used, while the marginal 
version was reserved for Study 2. Pilot testing was conducted in advance to examine the 
difference between the marginally qualified and well-qualified interview scripts. The 
qualified interview script (M = 5.40 on 1-6 scale, SD = 1.06) was perceived as more 
qualified than the marginally qualified interview script (M = 3.70, SD = 1.26), t (10) = 
2.62, p = .03, d = 1.51 in pilot testing.  
Both the qualified and marginally qualified versions of the interviews began with 
the interviewer (played by an actor) giving a brief introduction of the company and 
building rapport with the applicant. Then, the interviewer asked four job-related 
interview questions and the applicant answered them. The applicant’s answers to the 
interview questions portrayed either qualified interview performance (in the qualified 
version) or marginally qualified interview performance (in the marginal version). After 
---PAGE 59---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 58 
the applicant answered all of the interviewer’s questions, the interviewer brought the 
interview to an end by saying, “Well, those are all the questions I have for you today. It’s 
been a pleasure talking to you. We will be conducting more interviews over the next two 
weeks, after which you can expect to hear from us regarding whether we will be offering 
you a position in the Management Trainee Program. Is there anything you’d like to go 
over before we bring this to an end?” 
The applicant’s response to the interviewer changed depending on the condition. 
In the conditions where the applicant asked questions, the applicant said “I actually have 
a few questions about the program if we have enough time to go over them.” Then the 
applicant asked the interviewer his questions, after which the interview ended. In the 
conditions where the applicant did not ask any questions, the applicant responded to the 
interviewer, “No, I don’t think so. Thank you for meeting with me! I look forward to 
hearing from you!” after which the interview ended. A total of four different versions of 
the interview were created: (1) marginal interview with no questions from the applicant, 
(2) marginal interview with questions from the applicant, (3) qualified interview with no 
questions from the applicant, and (4) qualified interview with questions from the 
applicant. See Appendix D for full interview scripts.  
Measures 
Participants completed measures after watching the interview, with ratings of the 
applicant made first and general expectations for applicant questions filled out last before 
demographics. The items from the scales listed below may be found in Appendix E. 
Means, Standard Deviations, and Correlations of all measures included in the study may 
be found in Table 3. 
---PAGE 60---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 59 
Ratings completed after watching the interview. Participants completed scales 
regarding their attributions about the applicant first, followed by hiring ratings. 
Attributions. Attributions of applicant perceived P-O fit, extraversion, 
conscientiousness, openness to experience, preparation, motivation, interest in the job, 
and confidence were assessed via a number of scales.  
Person-organization fit. Person-organization fit was assessed with a seven-item 
scale created by the researcher. A sample item is, “I believe the applicant would fit in 
well at this organization.” Responses were on a Likert scale from 1 – strongly disagree to 
7 – strongly agree. Reliability for this scale was α = .91. 
Personality traits. The Big Five personality traits of extraversion, 
conscientiousness, and openness to experience were measured using the Big Five 
Inventory (John, Donahue, & Kentle, 1991). The Big Five Inventory consists of 44 items: 
8 items assessing extraversion, 9 items assessing conscientiousness, and 10 items 
assessing openness to experience (the remainder of which assess neuroticism and 
agreeableness). Responses were on a Likert scale from 1 – strongly disagree to 7 – 
strongly agree. In John et al.’s (1991) study, the internal consistency for the items 
measuring extraversion, conscientiousness, and openness were α = .86, α = .82, and α = 
.83, respectively. Reliabilities for this study were α = .88 for extraversion, α = .91 for 
conscientiousness, and α = .79 for openness to experience. 
Preparation. The applicant’s perceived preparation was assessed using six items 
created by the researcher. An example item is, “The applicant seems to have prepared for 
the interview.” Responses were on a Likert scale from 1 – strongly disagree to 7 strongly 
agree. Reliability for this scale was α = .85. 
---PAGE 61---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 60 
Motivation. The applicant’s perceived motivation was assessed via six items 
developed by the researcher. An example item is, “This applicant seemed motivated to 
impress the interviewer.” Responses were on a Likert scale from 1 – strongly disagree to 
7 – strongly agree. Reliability for this scale was α = .85. 
Interest in the job. The applicant’s perceived interest in the job was assessed via 
three items developed by the researcher. An example item is, “The applicant seemed 
eager to learn about the job.” Responses were on a Likert scale from 1 – strongly disagree 
to 7 – strongly agree. Reliability for this scale was α = .91. 
Confidence. The applicant’s perceived confidence was assessed via three items 
developed by the researcher. An example item is, “The applicant appeared confident.” 
Responses were on a Likert scale from 1 – strongly disagree to 7 – strongly agree. 
Reliability for this scale was α = .85. 
Hiring ratings. Hiring ratings were assessed with a five-item scale adapted from 
Cunningham and Macan (2007). An example item is, “I believe the candidate has the 
skills necessary to be successful in this job.” Responses were on a Likert scale from 1 – 
strongly disagree to 7 – strongly agree. Reliability for this scale was α = .92. Participants 
also responded to a single item asking them to make a rating on a different scale. The 
item was, “Would you recommend this person to be hired?” The response choices were:  
(1) No, I would definitely not hire this person,  
(2) I don’t think I would hire this person, although I might consider taking a look 
at some additional information about them,  
(3) I’m not sure if I would hire this person,  
(4) Yes, I would hire this person with few reservations,  
---PAGE 62---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 61 
(5) Yes, I would definitely hire this person. This person is an extremely good 
candidate.  
Finally, the participants were asked to make a dichotomous hiring decision about the 
applicant. This item was included because the response scale for the hiring items has a 
completely neutral midpoint, while this dichotomous item forces the participant to make 
a hiring decision. Participants were also asked an open-ended question about whether 
there was anything the applicant could have done differently to have changed their 
decision to hire or not hire the applicant. 
Expectation about the interview. The participant’s expectation for the applicant 
asking questions (one of the independent variables that was measured rather than 
manipulated) was assessed with the following item: “Do you expect applicants to ask the 
interviewer questions during the job interview?” Responses included:  
(a) Yes, applicants who are serious about working for the organization should ask 
questions during the interview,  
(b) I am open to hearing any questions the applicant might have, but I do not go 
into an interview expecting the applicant to ask or not ask questions, and  
(c) No, I do not believe that it is the applicant’s place to ask questions during the 
job interview.  
For this variable, 166 participants believed that applicants should ask questions, 70 
participants were open to hearing applicant questions during the interview but did not 
necessarily expect them, and 2 participants indicated that applicants should not ask 
questions. 
---PAGE 63---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 62 
In addition to expectation for questions, a seven-item measure assessing what 
participants believe an applicant should do to prepare for an interview was included as 
well. A sample item is “Please indicate the extent to which you expect an applicant, in 
preparing for a job interview, to do the following prior to the interview: research the 
company.” The response scale was 1-Never, 2-Rarely, 3-Sometimes, 4-Frequently, 5-
Always. Reliability for this scale was α = .79. To parallel this scale, there was a seven-
item measure assessing what participants believed the applicant they watched actually did 
to prepare for the job interview. The items for this measure corresponded to the scale 
about expectations. For example, a sample item is: “Please indicate the extent to which 
you believe the applicant you watched, in preparing for this job interview, did the 
following: researched the company.” The responses for this scale ranged from 1 – 
strongly disagree to 7 – strongly agree. Reliability for this scale was α = .82.  
Evaluation of questions. When participants indicated being in a condition in 
which the applicant asked questions, participants’ evaluations of the applicants’ questions 
were assessed with six items. A sample item is “The questions asked by the applicant 
reflected positively on him or her.” The response scale ranged from 1 – strongly disagree 
to 7 – strongly agree. Reliability for this scale was α = .93.  
Manipulation checks. Applicants were asked whether the applicant whose 
interview they watched asked any questions during the interview. Participants that 
incorrectly answered the manipulation check were removed from the dataset. As noted 
above, 51 participants were removed because they incorrectly indicated that applicants 
asked questions when they did not, or that they did not ask questions when they did.  
---PAGE 64---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 63 
Demographics. Finally, participants completed standard demographic questions 
including gender, age, ethnicity, U.S. citizenship, and if English was their first language. 
Participants also indicated their employment status and whether they worked part or full 
time to ensure that everyone filling out the survey was employed at least part time. 
Finally, there were multiple items about the degree of experience participants had with 
conducting employment interviews. 
Procedure  
Participants were randomly assigned to conditions. After giving their consent to 
proceed, the following introduction was read to participants: 
“You have been chosen to serve as a hiring manager for a 
Management Trainee Program at a St. Louis based company. At the 
moment, you are seeking to hire a Management Trainee.  The 
applicant you will be evaluating for this position has applied 
through the company’s career site, submitted a résumé, and has 
gone through a videotaped interview for the position. Now, we need 
your help evaluating the applicant for the job. To assist you in 
evaluating the applicant, you will be provided with a description of 
the Management Trainee Program, as well as the applicant’s 
résumé. After reviewing the résumé, you will be shown a video 
recording of the applicant’s interview.  Finally, after you have 
finished watching the interview, you will give your  opinion of the 
applicant and whether we should hire him using our evaluation 
form. 
---PAGE 65---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 64 
On the next page you will rev iew website content from the 
organization’s “About Us” page, and the Management Trainee 
Program description from the career section of the website where 
the applicant applied.  It is very important that you consider the 
requirements and responsibilities of the role as detailed in the 
program description to help you determine whether the applicant is 
right for the position. To ensure that you understand the role, please 
read the program description thoroughly. After carefully reviewing 
the description, you will be asked to reflect on what you have read 
and answer some open-ended questions. Before you can proceed to 
the rest of the study, you will also have to accurately complete a 
brief quiz about the program description. 
You will learn more about the Manageme nt Trainee 
Program on the next page, but first let's highlight some of the 
information from the description. The Management Trainee 
Program is an annual program, and anywhere between 10 and 20 
people get accepted each year. The purpose of the program is to  
train associates to become eventual Managers in one of 6 areas 
important to the company. Trainees will proceed through the 
program as a group, and will work closely together in even smaller 
groups as they gain exposure to each of the six different areas 
during their rotations. At the end of rotations, trainees will 
collaborate with leaders in the company to choose one of the six 
---PAGE 66---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 65 
areas that aligns with their interests, while also taking into account 
the organization’s talent needs and the trainee’s performa nce 
during rotations.  After work areas are selected, the management 
trainee program lasts another year. While the goal is to train 
individuals for management positions upon completion of the 
program, being immediately promoted at the end of the program is 
not guaranteed, but likely within 2 years of finishing.” 
After this introduction was read, participants were directed to the “About Us” 
page and program description. After reviewing those documents, they answered the open-
ended questions about the program description and then completed the quiz about what 
they learned about the company and Management Trainee Program. Following the quiz, 
participants were directed to the applicant’s résumé. Following the résumé, participants 
were read another set of instructions: 
Now that you have a better idea of what the Management Trainee 
Program entails, and you have reviewed the applicant’s résumé, you 
will watch the video recording of the applicant’s job interview. As a 
respected hiring manager in our company, we are co unting on you 
for your evaluation of the applicant. You should use everything you 
have learned about the job and the applicant to make an informed 
decision about whether this individual is a good candidate for the 
Management Trainee Program.  
After watching the interview, participants filled out a survey asking for their 
evaluations of the applicant and the manipulation check. Once participants finished 
---PAGE 67---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 66 
making all ratings about the applicant, the participants were asked to respond to all 
additional measures including their expectation for applicant questions in general and 
concluding with demographics.  
Study 1 Results 
Before analyzing the data, assumptions for normality and homogeneity of 
variance were tested. Assumptions of normality were met, and in the cases when 
homogeneity of variances was violated, the t-test adjusting for this violation (e.g., equal 
variances not assumed) is reported. Fifty-one participants were removed from the data set 
for failing the manipulation check. After data cleaning, 238 participants remained and 
were used for analysis.  
Tests of Hypotheses  
For hypotheses 1-8, analyses were conducted to examine differences among three 
Applicant Questions groups: (1) Asked questions that could have been answered on the 
website (n =74), (2) asked questions that could not have been answered on the website (n 
=78), and (3) did not ask questions (n =86). Again, for the two conditions in which 
questions were asked, the amount of information available on the website was used to 
determine whether questions could have been answered (more information on website) or 
could not have been answered (less information on website), since the questions 
applicants asked remained the same between conditions. This meant that participants 
rating applicants who did not ask questions were also exposed to a program description 
with either more information or less information depending on the condition to which 
they were randomly assigned. It was anticipated that there would be no differences 
between the two conditions in which questions were not asked, but differences were 
---PAGE 68---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 67 
tested between them to ensure it was appropriate to collapse across the two groups. For 
all hypotheses in Study 1, there were no differences found between the “did not ask 
questions” groups based on the amount of information on the website, and it was 
appropriate to combine these two groups when testing each of the below hypotheses. 
Applicant P-O fit. Hypothesis 1a-c anticipated that the relationship between 
applicant questions and perceived P-O fit of the applicant would vary depending on 
interviewer expectations for applicant questions. Hypothesis 1a focused on when 
participants believed applicants should ask questions, 1b focused on when participants 
believed applicants should not ask questions, and 1c focused on when participants were 
open to questions, but did not believe applicants must ask them. Hypothesis 1b could not 
be meaningfully tested given that only two participants indicated that applicants should 
not ask questions. The relationships in Hypothesis 1a and 1c were able to be examined.  
A 3 (applicant questions: asked questions that could not be answered on the 
website, asked questions that could be answered on the website, did not ask questions) x 
2 (interviewer expectations for questions: believes applicants should ask questions, open 
to questions but does not necessarily expect them) between groups ANOVA was 
conducted. The interaction effect between applicant questions and interviewer 
expectations for questions on perceived P-O fit of the applicant was statistically 
significant F (2, 230) = 3.56, p = .03, η2 = .03. When participants expected questions, 
applicants who asked questions that could not be answered on the website (M = 6.28, SD 
= .71) were perceived as having statistically significantly greater P-O Fit than applicants 
who did not ask questions (M = 5.87, SD = 1.09), t (163) = 2.46, p = .02, d = .45. 
Furthermore, the difference between applicants who asked questions that could be 
---PAGE 69---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 68 
answered on the website (M = 6.20, SD = .71) and applicants who did not ask questions 
(M = 5.87, SD = 1.09), was approaching significance, t (163) = 1.95, p = .05, d = .36. 
There was no significant difference between applicants who asked questions that could 
not be answered on the website (M = 6.28, SD = .71) and applicants who asked questions 
that could be answered on the website (M = 6.20, SD = .71), t (163) = .52, p = .60, d = 
.11. Hypothesis 1a was supported.  
When participants did not expect questions but were open to hearing them, 
applicants who asked questions that could not be answered on the website (M = 5.99, SD 
= 1.01) were not perceived as having statistically significantly higher P-O fit than 
applicants who did not ask questions (M = 6.33, SD = .80), t (67) = -1.39, p = .17, d = 
.37. Additionally, applicants who asked questions that could not be answered on the 
website (M = 5.99, SD = 1.01) were not perceived as having statistically significantly 
higher P-O fit than applicants who asked questions that could be answered on the website 
(M = 6.10, SD = .71), t (67) = -.89, p = .38, d = .13. Thus, hypothesis 1c was not 
supported. See Figure 2. 
Applicant personality. Hypotheses 2 and 3 predicted increased perceptions of 
extraversion (hypothesis 2) and openness to experience (hypothesis 3) when applicants 
asked questions as opposed to when applicants did not ask questions. Tests of planned 
comparisons showed that applicants who asked questions that could not be answered on 
the website (M = 5.05, SD = 1.03) were perceived as statistically significantly more 
extraverted than applicants who asked no questions (M = 4.63, SD = 1.33), t (235) = 
2.36, p = .02, d = .35. However, applicants who asked questions that could be answered 
on the website (M = 4.76, SD = 1.07) were not perceived as statistically significantly 
---PAGE 70---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 69 
more extraverted than those who asked no questions (M = 4.63, SD = 1.33), t (235) = .75, 
p = .46, d = .10. Hypotheses 2 was partially supported. See Figure 3. 
Similarly to perceived extraversion, applicants who asked questions that could not 
answered on the website (M = 5.13, SD = .77) were perceived as statistically 
significantly more open to experience than applicants who did not ask questions (M = 
4.80, SD = .88), t (235) = 2.63, p < .01, d = .40. Again, though, applicants who asked 
questions that could be answered on the website (M = 4.83, SD = .72) were not perceived 
as statistically significantly more open to experience than those who did not ask questions 
(M = 4.80, SD = .88), t (235) = .22, p = .83, d = .04. There was also an additional 
difference found for openness to experience not found for extraversion; applicants who 
asked questions that could not be answered on the website (M = 5.13, SD = .77) were 
perceived as statistically significantly more open to experience than applicants who asked 
questions that could be answered on the website (M = 4.83, SD = .72), t (235) = 2.32, p < 
.02, d = .40. Hypothesis 2 was partially supported. See Figure 4. 
Planned comparisons were used to test Hypothesis 4 regarding the difference in 
the perceived conscientiousness of applicants who asked questions that could not have 
been answered on the website compared to applicants who did not ask questions and 
applicants who asked questions that could have been answered on the website. Applicants 
who asked questions that could not have been answered on the website (M = 6.02, SD = 
.78) were not perceived as statistically significantly more conscientious than applicants 
who asked questions that could have been answered on the website (M = 5.84, SD = .98), 
t (235) = 1.17, p = .24, d = .20. Applicants who asked questions that could not have been 
answered on the website (M = 6.02, SD = .78) were also not perceived as statistically 
---PAGE 71---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 70 
significantly more conscientious than applicants who did not ask any questions (M = 
5.80, SD = 1.05), t (235) = 1.50, p = .14, d = .23. Hypothesis 4 was not supported. See 
Figure 5. 
 Applicant motivation. The same planned comparisons made for 
conscientiousness in Hypothesis 4 were made for motivation in Hypothesis 5. Applicants 
who asked questions that could not have been answered on the website (M = 5.85, SD = 
.89) were not perceived as statistically significantly more motivated than applicants who 
asked questions that could have been answered on the website (M = 5.74, SD = 1.03), t 
(235) = .64, p = .52, d = .11. Applicants who asked questions that could not have been 
answered on the website (M = 5.85, SD = .89) were also not perceived as statistically 
significantly more motivated than applicants who did not ask questions (M = 5.61, SD = 
1.19), t (235) = 1.45, p = .15. d = .23 Hypothesis 5 was not supported. See Figure 6. 
Applicant interest in the job. To test hypothesis 6 regarding the suspected 
difference in perceived interest in the job between applicants who asked questions that 
could not have been answered on the website, applicants who asked questions that could 
have been answered on the website, and applicants who did not ask any questions, 
planned comparisons were used. Applicants who did not ask questions (M = 4.98, SD = 
1.53) were perceived as statistically significantly less interested in the job than applicants 
who asked questions that could have been answered on the website (M = 5.91, SD = 
1.00), t (147.97) = 4.61, p < .001, d = .76, and were also perceived as statistically 
significantly less interested in the job than applicants who asked questions that could not 
have been answered on the website (M = 6.13, SD = .93), t (142.12) = 5.87, p < .001, d = 
.98. Hypothesis 6 was only partially supported, however, because there was no significant 
---PAGE 72---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 71 
difference found between applicants who asked questions that could not have been 
answered on the website (M = 6.13, SD = .93) and applicants who asked questions that 
could have been answered on the website (M = 5.91, SD = 1.00), t (147.56) = 1.38, p = 
.17, d = .23. See Figure 7. 
Applicant preparation for the interview. To test hypothesis 7 regarding the 
suspected difference in perceived applicant preparation between applicants who asked 
questions that could have been answered on the website, applicants who did not ask any 
questions, and applicants who asked questions that could not have been answered on the 
website, planned comparisons were conducted. There were no significant differences in 
perceived preparation for any of the following comparisons: (1) applicants who asked 
questions that could not have been answered on the website (M = 5.78, SD = .97) and 
applicants who did not ask questions (M = 5.57, SD = 1.23), t (235) = 1.21, p = .23, d = 
.16, (2) applicants who asked questions that could have been answered on the website (M 
= 5.52, SD = 1.05) and applicants who did not ask questions (M = 5.57, SD = 1.23), t 
(235) = .26, p = .78, d = .03, and (3) applicants who asked questions that could not have 
been answered on the website (M = 5.78, SD = .97) and applicants who asked questions 
that could have been answered on the website (M = 5.52, SD = 1.05), t (235) = 1.42, p = 
.16, d = .19. Hypothesis 7 was not supported. See Figure 8. 
Hiring ratings. To test hypothesis 8 that positive interviewer attributions of the 
applicant (Openness, Extraversion, Conscientiousness, Preparation, Interest, Motivation, 
and P-O fit) relate positively to hiring ratings, a multiple regression analysis was 
conducted. The overall model predicted hiring ratings, F (7, 230) = 27.94, p < .001, R2 = 
.44. Three attributions, perceived P-O fit (B = .35, SEB = .12, p < .01), perceived 
---PAGE 73---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 72 
conscientiousness (B = .27, SEB = .11, p = .01), and perceived motivation (B = .23, SEB = 
.10, p = .02), added statistically significantly to the prediction of hiring ratings in the 
expected direction. Regression coefficients and standard errors for all variables included 
can be found in Table 3. 
To test hypotheses 9a-b about the interaction between applicant questions and 
applicant résumé qualifications, a 2 (applicant résumé qualifications: well qualified, 
marginally qualified) X 3 (applicant questions: asked questions that could not have been 
answered on the website, asked questions that could have been answered on the website, 
did not ask questions) between groups ANOVA was conducted. The interaction effect 
between applicant questions and applicant résumé qualifications on the hiring rating of 
the applicant was not significant, F (2, 232) = 1.06, p = .35, η2 = .01. There was also no 
significant main effect of applicant questions, F (2, 232) = 2.59, p = .08, η2 = .02, nor 
was there a significant main effect of applicant résumé qualifications, F (1, 232) < .001, p 
= .98, η2 < .001. Hypotheses 9a and 9b were not supported. See Figure 9. 
Study 1 Discussion 
Study 1 sought to determine how the questions applicants ask or do not ask the 
interviewer can affect interviewer’s perceptions of these applicants, including whether or 
not they believe the applicant should be extended a job offer. When interview 
performance was otherwise high, whether or not applicants asked questions during the 
interview did not impact interviewers’ perceptions of applicant conscientiousness, 
motivation, preparation for the interview, or hiring ratings. Applicants who asked 
questions, however, were perceived as more interested in the job than applicants who did 
not ask questions. Interviewer expectations also played a role; when interviewers 
---PAGE 74---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 73 
expected questions, applicants who asked them were rated as being a better fit with the 
organization than applicants who did not ask questions. The type of questions asked also 
matters in some cases. Only applicants who asked questions that they could not have 
answered via information available to them before the interview were perceived as more 
extraverted than applicants who did not ask questions. Additionally, these applicants 
were perceived as more open to experience than applicants who did not ask questions and 
applicants who asked questions that could have, and perhaps should have, been answered 
before the interview. Finally, interviewers perceptions of various applicant characteristics 
affect hiring ratings, some more than others. P-O fit, conscientiousness, and motivation 
were most strongly related to hiring ratings. Whether applicants seemed to be better or 
worse qualified via their résumés, on the other hand, did not statistically significantly 
affect hiring ratings. 
Taking a deeper dive into the hypotheses that were supported or partially 
supported, when interviewers believed that applicants should ask questions, applicants 
whose behavior aligned with those expectations were perceived as being a better fit for 
the organization than those who did not ask questions. On the other hand, whether 
applicants asked questions or not did not alter interviewers’ perceptions of how well 
applicants would fit with the organization when interviewers were open to questions, but 
did not believe strongly either way that they should or should not be asked. Perhaps in the 
absence of a strong conviction that applicants either should or should not ask questions, 
whether or not an applicant asks questions does not affect perceived P-O fit one way or 
the other simply because there is no strong interviewer belief to which the applicant could 
align. Overall it appears preferences of the interviewer can affect how applicants who ask 
---PAGE 75---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 74 
or do not ask questions are evaluated when the interviewer’s expectations are not neutral 
and they definitively expect the applicant to either ask questions or not ask questions. 
Another key finding is that applicants who asked questions were perceived as 
more interested in the job than applicants who did not ask questions. Unexpectedly, 
though, it was not just those who asked questions that could not have been answered on 
the website that were perceived as more interested, but also those who asked questions 
that could have been answered on the website. In retrospect, this makes sense, especially 
if interviewers believe that the act of prolonging the interview by asking additional 
questions shows interest. Other than P-O fit, interest was the only attribution for which 
the availability of the question’s answer on the website did not come into play. For the 
other applicant characteristics in which the applicant’s decision to ask or not ask 
questions mattered (i.e., extraversion and openness to experience), whether or not the 
question could have been answered prior to the interview made a difference. 
The role that the answer availability of the question played in affecting perceived 
extraversion and openness to experience was unexpected. In these cases, it was believed 
that applicants who asked any type of question would be perceived as more extraverted 
and open to experience than those who did not ask questions. Strangely though, only 
applicants who asked questions that could not have been answered on the website were 
perceived as more extraverted and open to experience than those who did not ask 
questions. Additionally, these applicants were also perceived as more open to experience 
than applicants who asked questions that could have been answered on the website. These 
findings to an extent support the research of Taylor, Friedman, and Coolsen (2013), 
which provided evidence that applicants who ask questions about the job, organization, or 
---PAGE 76---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 75 
hiring process during the interview are perceived as more extraverted and open to 
experience. Yet, the results of this study also suggest that not all questions about the job 
lead interviewers to perceive applicants asking them as more extraverted and open to 
experience. Questions that address something new and different than the information 
already available may be more influential on how extraverted or open to experience an 
applicant is perceived. The unexpected impact of asking questions that could not have 
been answered prior to the interview on openness to experience potentially makes sense 
when considering the content of certain items included in this scale, such as “is 
inventive”, and “prefers routine work” (reverse coded). Asking questions that could have 
been answered on the website shows a lack of inventiveness and an inclination toward the 
routine and usual (i.e., the information that had already been provided). More research is 
needed to fully understand why those asking questions, regardless of question type, were 
not perceived as more extraverted as expected. The items included on that scale including 
talkativeness, energy, enthusiasm, assertiveness, sociability should not have been affected 
by the content of the questions. 
Despite the findings above indicating that asking questions has the potential to 
impact how interviewers perceive applicants in terms of their fit with the organization, 
their interest in the job, how extraverted they are, and how open to experience, for the 
other half of the examined attributions the expected differences were not supported. 
Applicants who asked questions were perceived as no more conscientious, motivated, or 
prepared for the interview than those who did not ask questions, nor were those who 
asked questions that could not have been answered on the website perceived any more 
favorably in terms of these attributions than those who asked questions that could have 
---PAGE 77---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 76 
been answered on the website. One explanation for the lack of statistically significant 
results could have been a lack of statistical power. Interviewers’ perceptions of the 
quality of the applicants’ questions was examined to attempt to explain why the 
availability of question answers did not affect perceptions of applicant in the ways 
expected.  
The quality of questions was assessed through a six item scale consisting of items 
such as “The questions the applicant asked the interviewer were good ones” and “I had a 
positive reaction to the questions the applicant asked the interviewer.” When applicants 
asked questions that could not have been answered on the website (presumed to be better 
questions than those that were answered on the website), the questions were rated more 
favorably (M = 5.61, SD = 1.32) than when applicants asked questions that could have 
been answered on the website (M = 5.02, SD = 1.42), t (150) = 2.66, p = .01, d = .43. 
However, going back to hypothesized effects, we found none of the expected differences 
in the ratings of applicants who asked higher quality questions (questions that could not 
be answered on the website) and applicants who asked lower quality questions (questions 
that could be answered in advance) for conscientiousness, motivation, preparation, and 
interest in the job. That is, even though the questions that could not have been answered 
on the website were perceived as better quality than questions that could have been 
answered on the website, there were no significant differences in the characteristics 
attributed to applicants based upon whether the questions asked were better or worse in 
most cases. 
Digging deeper into some of the items included in the “question quality” scale 
may provide some insight. One of these items in particular focused on whether the 
---PAGE 78---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 77 
applicant should have known the answers to the questions he asked (i.e., “The applicant 
asked questions to which he or she should have known the answers already”). Unlike the 
other items in this scale, there was no significant difference in the ratings of applicants 
who asked questions that could have been answered on the website or those who asked 
questions that could not have been answered on the website for this item. This may 
indicate that, overall, even though interviewers rated asking questions whose answers 
could not be found ahead of time as higher quality than those whose answers were readily 
available, they did not necessarily expect all applicants to already know those answers 
just because the information was available. Perhaps these interviewers gave applicants 
the benefit of the doubt, or they were not consciously attuned to the fact that applicants 
were asking questions they could have answered in advance (i.e., the manipulation was 
not strong enough). Considering the number of participants that had to be deleted because 
the could not correctly answer if the applicant asked questions, it is not inconceivable that 
whether or not the questions could have been answered in advance was lost on many 
participants as well. In retrospect, a question asking participants if the applicant asked 
questions that could have been answered on the website could have provided greater 
clarity here.  
 Another potential explanation for the lack of fully supported hypotheses in Study 
1 is that the good interview performance of the applicant (without considering the 
questions the applicant did or did not ask) undermined any difference in qualifications 
between the two résumés. During pilot testing, the marginally qualified résumé was 
perceived as less qualified than the well qualified résumé, but the résumés were tested in 
isolation from the interviews. When combined with the interview in the actual study, 
---PAGE 79---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 78 
participants could be considering the qualifications of the applicant overall, and it may be 
that the marginal résumé did not present the candidate as poorly qualified enough to have 
much of an impact on the overall perceived qualifications of the applicant when coupled 
with the strong interview performance. Considering this possibility, Study 2 examines the 
same relationships hypothesized in Study 1, but this time holds qualifications via the 
résumé constant (i.e., well qualified) while manipulating interview performance (i.e., 
marginal performance or good performance). Some of the relationships that did not 
emerge in Study 1 may be more likely to be supported with greater variation in perceived 
interview performance. 
Study 2 
 Study 1 was primarily focused on whether applicant questions differentially 
affected interview outcomes depending on information availability on the website and 
applicant pre-interview qualifications (résumé qualifications). Another interesting and 
similar question is whether applicant questions differentially affect interview outcomes 
depending on information availability on the website and applicant interview 
performance, holding applicant pre-interview qualifications (i.e., résumé qualifications) 
constant.  
While the résumé and interview should both be indicators of applicant quality, it 
may have been that when taken together, the interview was more salient when evaluating 
the applicant, especially considering that in this study both the marginal and qualified 
résumés were deemed “qualified enough” to warrant an interview of the applicant. 
Although many hypotheses were not supported in Study 1, it was expected that achieving 
a greater degree of variance in the perceived qualifications of the applicant in Study 2, by 
---PAGE 80---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 79 
manipulating interview performance rather than résumé qualifications, could be more 
salient to interviewers and result in differences in outcomes. Thus, hypotheses 1-8 in 
Study 1 were also tested in Study 2 as hypotheses 10-18.  
It was also expected that when an applicant’s interview performance was 
marginal, those not asking any questions and those asking questions that could have been 
answered on the website should receive less favorable ratings than applicants who asked 
job related questions that could not have been answered on the website. Applicant 
questions will have a greater effect on ratings for marginal interview qualifications 
because an applicant with marginal interview performance who asks good questions has a 
lower baseline to begin with than a qualified applicant, leaving more room to make a 
positive difference. Plus, interviewers may perceive that well qualified applicants have 
already proven their qualifications when answering the interview questions, so asking no 
questions or even “bad” questions are less likely to have an effect on their ratings than it 
would for those who are marginally qualified and have more to prove. 
Hypothesis 19: There will be an interaction between applicant qualifications and 
applicant questions.  
Hypothesis 19a: For applicants with marginal interview performance, 
hiring ratings for those asking questions that cannot be answered on the 
website will be statistically significantly more positive than for those 
asking questions that can be answered on the website and those asking no 
questions. No differences are expected between those who ask questions 
that can be answered on the website and those asking no questions. 
Hypothesis 19b: For applicants who ask no questions and applicants who 
ask questions that can be answered on the website, applicants with strong 
interview performance will receive better ratings than applicants with 
marginal interview performance, whereas this effect will be diminished for 
those asking questions that cannot be answered on the website. 
 
---PAGE 81---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 80 
 
Study 2 Method 
Participants 
The sample consisted of 287 psychology and business students from the 
University of Missouri-St. Louis. Students were required to be employed at least part 
time to participate. Participants ranged in age from 18 to 56 years (M = 23.97, SD = 
6.36), with 73% being female. The racial composition was 70% Caucasian, 18% African 
American, 3% Asian, 3% Hispanic, and 6% other ethnic backgrounds. Fifty-three 
participants were deleted due to failing the manipulation check inquiring whether the 
applicant asked the interviewer questions at any time during the interview, resulting in a 
total sample size of 234 participants (See Table 5). All participants received research 
credit for their participation in this study. 
Design 
The procedure used in Study 2 was identical to the one used in Study 1 with one 
exception: rather than manipulating applicant qualifications on the résumé and holding 
interview performance constant, applicant interview performance was manipulated while 
qualifications on the résumé were held constant. That is, the applicant appeared well-
qualified in terms of his résumé, but the content of his responses to interview questions 
was modified to suggest either stronger or poorer interview performance up to the point 
where the applicant asked or did not ask questions. Participants were randomly assigned 
to one condition in a 2 (Applicant questions: did not ask questions, asked questions) x 2 
(Information availability: more information on the website, less information on the 
website) x 2 (Applicant interview qualifications: well qualified, marginally qualified) 
---PAGE 82---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 81 
fully crossed factorial design for a total of 8 conditions. Another independent variable, 
interviewer beliefs about asking questions, was measured rather than manipulated. See 
Table 6 for conditions and sample sizes.  
Materials 
The same materials and measures used in Study 1 were used in Study 2. 
Reliabilities for Study 2’s scales can be found in Table 7. Means, standard deviations, 
and intercorrelations of all measures used in Study 2 can be found in Table 8. 
Study 2 Results 
Before analyzing the data, assumptions for normality and homogeneity of 
variance were tested. Assumptions of normality were met, and in the cases when 
homogeneity of variances was violated, the t-test adjusting for this violation (e.g., equal 
variances not assumed) is reported. Fifty-three participants were removed from the data 
set for failing the manipulation check. After data cleaning, 234 participants remained and 
were used for analysis.  
Tests of Hypotheses  
For hypotheses 10-18, analyses were conducted to examine differences among 
three Applicant Questions groups: Asked questions that could have been answered on the 
website (n =61), asked questions that could not have been answered on the website (n 
=59), and did not ask questions (n =91). Specifically, we wanted to determine if it was 
appropriate to collapse across the two groups in which questions were not asked: did not 
ask questions with more information available on the website, and did not ask questions 
with less information available on the website. If there were differences found between 
the “did not ask questions” groups based on amount of information on the website, and it 
---PAGE 83---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 82 
was not appropriate to treat them the same, it is noted in each of the following sections 
below. 
Applicant P-O fit. Hypothesis 10 anticipated different relationships between 
applicant questions and perceived P-O fit of the applicant depending on differences in the 
interviewer’s expectation for questions. As in Study 1, the comparison in hypothesis 10b 
could not be meaningfully tested given that only two participants indicated that applicants 
should not ask questions. A 3 (applicant questions: asked questions that could not have 
been answered on website, asked questions that could have been answered on website, 
did not ask questions) x 2 (interviewer expectations for questions: believes applicants 
should ask questions, open to questions but does not necessarily expect them) between 
groups ANOVA was conducted. The interaction effect between applicant questions and 
interviewer expectations for questions on perceived P-O fit of the applicant was not 
statistically significant, F (2, 225) = 1.07, p = .34, η2 = .01. However, the individual 
effects of asking questions on P-O fit were still examined for each type of interviewer 
expectation (e.g., applicants should ask questions and interviewers are open to hearing 
questions but don’t expect them). When participants expected questions, applicants who 
asked questions that could not have been answered on the website (M = 5.72, SD = 1.37) 
were perceived as having statistically significantly greater P-O Fit than applicants who 
did not ask questions (M = 4.77, SD = 1.61), t (158) = 3.44, p = .001, d = .64. 
Furthermore, the difference between applicants who asked questions that could have been 
answered on the website (M = 5.50, SD = 1.28) and applicants who did not ask questions 
(M = 4.77, SD = 1.61), was significant, t (158) = 2.66, p < .01, d = .50. There was no 
significant difference between applicants who asked questions that could not have been 
---PAGE 84---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 83 
answered on the website (M = 5.72, SD = 1.37) and applicants who asked questions that 
could have been answered on the website (M = 5.50, SD = 1.28), t (158) = .72, p = .47, d 
= .17. Hypothesis 10a was supported.  
When participants did not expect questions but were open to hearing them, 
applicants who asked questions that could not have been answered on the website (M = 
5.81, SD = 1.23) were not perceived as having statistically significantly higher P-O fit 
than applicants who did not ask questions (M = 5.48, SD = 1.44), t (67) = .45, p = .17, d 
= .25. Additionally, applicants who asked questions that could not have been answered 
on the website (M = 5.57, SD = 1.26) were not perceived as having higher P-O fit than 
applicants who asked questions that could have been answered on the website (M = 5.48, 
SD = 1.44), t (67) = .86, p = .38, d = .07. Thus, hypothesis 10c was not supported. See 
Figure 10. 
Applicant personality. To test hypothesis 11 and 12 about the differences in 
perceived extraversion and openness to experience between applicants who asked 
questions and applicants who did not ask questions, planned comparisons were used. 
Applicants who asked questions that could have been answered on the website (M = 4.45, 
SD = 1.06) were perceived as statistically significantly more extraverted than applicants 
who did not ask questions (M = 4.07, SD = 1.27), t (137.24) = 2.12, p = .04, d = .32). 
Additionally, applicants who asked questions that could not have been answered on the 
website (M = 4.79, SD = .94) were perceived as more extraverted than applicants who 
did not ask questions (M = 4.07, SD = 1.27), t (155.30) = 4.27, p < .001, d = .64). There 
was no significant difference in the perceived extraversion of applicants who asked 
questions that could have been answered on the website (M = 4.45, SD = 1.06) and 
---PAGE 85---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 84 
applicants who asked questions that could not have been answered on the website (M = 
4.79, SD = .95), t (115.39) = 1.84, p = .07, d = .34). Hypothesis 11 was supported. See 
Figure 11. 
Applicants who asked questions that could have been answered on the website (M 
= 4.56, SD = .78) were perceived as statistically significantly more open to experience 
than applicants who did not ask questions (M = 4.17, SD = .98), t (231) = 2.78, p <.01, d 
= .44). Applicants who asked questions that could not have been answered on the website 
(M = 4.82, SD = .82) were perceived as statistically significantly more open to 
experience than applicants who did not ask questions (M = 4.17, SD = .98), t (231) = 
4.63, p <.001, d = .72). As with extraversion, there was no significant difference in the 
perceived openness to experience of applicants who asked questions that could have been 
answered on the website (M = 4.56, SD = .78) and applicants who asked questions that 
could not have been answered on the website (M = 4.82, SD = .82), t (231) = 1.58, p = 
.12, d = .32. Hypothesis 12 was also supported. See Figure 12. 
Prior to testing hypothesis 13 regarding conscientiousness, it was determined that 
the “no questions, more information on website” condition and the “no questions, less 
information on website” condition could not be collapsed into a single “did not ask 
questions” group as anticipated due to differences depending upon how much 
information was available on the website. The results of a 2 (amount of information on 
website: less, more) x 2 (questions: questions not asked, questions asked) fully-crossed 
ANOVA showed a significant interaction between amount of information on website and 
applicant questions on perceived conscientiousness F (1, 230) = 6.68, p = .01, η2 = .03. 
That is, the effect of asking questions or not asking questions on perceived 
---PAGE 86---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 85 
conscientiousness depended on how much information was available on the website. 
When applicants did not ask questions, participants exposed to more information on the 
website perceived the applicants as statistically significantly more conscientious (M = 
5.02, SD = 1.39) than those exposed to less information on the website (M = 4.42, SD = 
1.58), F (1,112) = 4.65, p = .03, η2 = .04. When less information was available on the 
website, applicants who asked questions (i.e., asked questions that could not have been 
answered on the website) (M = 5.44, SD =1.29) were perceived as statistically 
significantly more conscientious than those who did not ask questions (M = 4.42, SD = 
1.58), F (1,116) = 14.91, p <.001, η2 = .11. Hypothesis 13 was not supported. See Figure 
13. 
 Applicant motivation. To test hypothesis 14 regarding the proposed differences 
in perceived motivation among applicants who asked questions that could not have been 
answered on the website, applicants who did not ask questions, and applicants who asked 
questions that could have been answered on the website, planned comparisons were 
conducted. As expected, applicants who asked questions that could not have been 
answered on the website (M = 5.56, SD = 1.05) were perceived as statistically 
significantly more motivated than applicants who did not ask questions (M = 4.76, SD = 
1.49), t (159.94) = 4.14, p <.001, d = .65). Applicants who asked questions that could 
have been answered on the website (M = 5.44, SD = 1.15) were also perceived as 
statistically significantly more motivated than those who did not ask questions (M = 4.76, 
SD = 1.49), t (145.24) = 3.26, p = .001, d = .54). Unexpectedly, there was no significant 
difference between those who asked questions that could not have been answered (M = 
5.56, SD = 1.05) and those who asked questions that could have been answered (M = 
---PAGE 87---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 86 
5.44, SD = 1.15), t (231) = 1.76, p = .08, d = .23) Hypothesis 14 was partially supported. 
See Figure 14. 
Applicant interest in the job. To test hypothesis 15 regarding the suspected 
difference in perceived interest in the job between applicants who asked questions that 
could not have been answered on the website, applicants who asked questions that could 
have been answered on the website, and applicants who did not ask any questions, 
planned comparisons were used. There were significant differences in perceived interest 
in the job for all of the following comparisons: (1) applicants who asked questions that 
could not have been answered on the website (M = 5.94, SD = .91) and applicants who 
did not ask questions (M = 4.09, SD = 1.63), t (172.71) = 9.65, p <.001, d = 1.40, (2) 
applicants who asked questions that could have been answered on the website (M = 5.44, 
SD = 1.31) and applicants who did not ask questions (M = 4.09, SD = 1.63), t (141.40) = 
5.89, p < .001, d = .91, and (3) applicants who asked questions that could not have been 
answered on the website (M = 5.94, SD = .91) and applicants who asked questions that 
could have been answered on the website (M = 5.44, SD = 1.31), t (102.76) = 2.93, p < 
.001, d = .44. Hypothesis 15 was supported. See Figure 15. 
Applicant preparation for the interview. Prior to testing hypothesis 16 
regarding perceived applicant preparation, it was determined that the “no questions, more 
information on website” condition and the “no questions, less information on website” 
condition could not be collapsed into a single “did not ask questions” group as anticipated 
due to differences depending upon how much information was available on the website. 
The results of a 2 (information on website: less, more) x 2 (questions: questions not 
asked, questions asked) fully-crossed ANOVA showed a significant main effect of asking 
---PAGE 88---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 87 
questions: those who asked questions (M = 5.13, SD = 1.34) were perceived as more 
prepared than those who did not ask questions (M =4.52, SD = 1.67), F (1,230) = 9.99, p 
< .01, η2 = .04. However, this main effect was qualified by a significant interaction of 
amount of information on the website with asks questions on perceived applicant 
preparation, F (1,230) = 10.79, p = .001, η2 = .05. That is, the effect of asking questions 
or not asking questions on perceived preparation depended on how much information was 
available on the website. When no questions were asked, participants who viewed the 
website with more information rated the applicant as more prepared (M = 4.87, SD = 
1.41) than the participants who viewed the website with less information (M = 4.16, SD 
= 1.85), F (1,112) = 5.42, p = .02, η2 = .05. When the applicant asked questions, the 
opposite trend emerged. Those who asked questions that could not have been answered 
on the website (less information) (M = 5.41 SD = 1.22), were rated as more prepared 
than those who asked questions that could have been answered on the website (more 
information) (M = 4.85, SD = 1.40), F (1,118) = 5.41, p = .02, η2 = .05. When less 
information was available on the website, those who asked questions (that could not have 
been answered on the website) (M = 5.41, SD = 1.22) were perceived as more prepared 
than those who did not ask questions (M = 4.16, SD = 1.85), F (1,116) = 19.08, p < .001, 
η2 = .14). When there was more information available on the website, there was no 
difference between those who asked questions that could have been answered on the 
website (M = 4.85, SD = 1.40) and those who did not ask questions (M = 4.87, SD = 
1.41). Hypothesis 16 was partially supported. See Figure 16. 
Hiring ratings. To test hypothesis 17 that positive interviewer attributions of the 
applicant (Openness, Extraversion, Conscientiousness, Preparation, Interest, Motivation, 
---PAGE 89---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 88 
and P-O fit) relate positively to hiring ratings, a multiple regression analysis was 
conducted. The overall model statistically significantly predicted hiring ratings, F (7, 
202) = 48.10, p < .001, R2 = .79. Three attributions, perceived P-O fit (B = .41, SEB = .10, 
p < .001), perceived motivation (B = .34, SEB = .11, p < .01), and perceived 
conscientiousness (B = .22, SEB = .10, p = .02), added statistically significantly to the 
prediction of hiring ratings in the expected direction. Regression coefficients and 
standard errors for all variables included can be found in Table 9. 
To test hypotheses 18a-b about the interaction between applicant questions and 
applicant qualifications, a 2 (applicant interview qualifications: well qualified, marginally 
qualified) X 3 (applicant questions: asked questions that could not have been answered 
on the website, asked questions that could have been answered on the website, did not 
ask questions) between groups ANOVA was conducted. The interaction effect between 
applicant questions and applicant résumé qualifications on the hiring rating of the 
applicant was not significant at the p < .05 level, F (2, 225) = .21, p = .81, η2 < .01. There 
was also not a significant main effect of applicant questions, F (2, 225) = .38, p = .69, η2 
< .01. Consequently, hypotheses 18 was not supported. However, there was a significant 
main effect of interview qualifications, such that applicants who had well qualified 
interview performance (M = 5.68, SD = 1.29) received higher hiring ratings than 
applicants who had marginally qualified interview performance (M = 4.44, SD = 1.55), F 
(2, 204) = 37.25, p < .001, η2 = .15. See Figure 17. 
Study 2 Discussion 
The objective of Study 2 was to investigate whether applicant questions are 
related to interview outcomes and if so, the role that the attributions interviewers make 
---PAGE 90---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 89 
about applicants play when the candidate has good résumé qualifications but their 
interview performances show them to be either well qualified or marginally qualified for 
the job. Although theoretically there was reason to expect that asking or not asking 
questions should impact the attributions interviewers make about applicants, there was no 
evidence to support this in Study 1 except for P-O fit, extraversion, openness to 
experience, and interest in the job. However, the interview performance, which portrayed 
a highly qualified applicant, may have limited any differences between means. Including 
an applicant with interview performance suggesting a more marginally qualified 
applicant, as Study 2 did, may allow for the differences that were not supported in Study 
1 to emerge in Study 2.  
In contrast to Study 1, in Study 2 applicant questions impacted every attribution 
interviewers made about the applicant, even if not exactly as hypothesized. Once again, 
P-O fit, conscientiousness, and motivation were the strongest predictors of the hiring 
ratings interviewers made. While whether an applicant asked questions or not did not 
impact ultimate hiring ratings, their interview performance did.  
As in Study 1, interviewer expectations for questions once again played a role in 
how well applicants were perceived to fit at the organization. When interviewers believed 
that applicants should ask questions, applicants who asked questions were perceived as 
having better P-O fit than those who did not ask questions. Again, applicant questions 
had no effect on perceived P-O fit when participants were open to questions, but did not 
believe strongly either way that they should or should not be asked. This once more 
provides support for the notion that when interviewer expectations are clearly defined, an 
applicant whose behavior matches those expectations will be perceived as a better fitting 
---PAGE 91---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 90 
candidate. These results are in alignment with what was found in Study 1 and provide 
additional support that preferences of the interviewer can affect how applicants are 
perceived when applicant behavior aligns or does not aligns with interviewer 
expectations. However, when there are no strict expectations about asking questions with 
which to align, as was the case when interviewers are open to questions but do not 
necessarily expect them, applicants who asked questions were not perceived as having 
any greater fit with the organization than those who did not. 
Applicants who asked questions were also perceived as more extraverted, open to 
experience, and motivated than applicants who did not ask questions, as was 
hypothesized. This makes sense considering that asking questions both extends the social 
interaction and time spent with the interviewer, which fits with the extravert’s tendency 
towards being socially active and outgoing. Furthermore, asking questions is an 
opportunity to learn something new, satisfy one’s curiosity, and stimulate the mind, 
activities that those high in openness to experience enjoy. While the differences in 
perceptions between applicants who did and did not ask questions was expected for 
conscientiousness and openness to experience, it was expected that whether the question 
could be answered on the website or not would also affect perceived motivation ratings, 
for which we found no support. It appears that just extending the interview by asking 
questions may be seen as sufficient indication of an applicant’s motivation to impress the 
interviewer, perform well, and secure a job offer.  
Findings were a bit more complex for perceived applicant conscientiousness 
because there were differences between applicants who did not ask questions when there 
was more information available on the website versus when there was less information 
---PAGE 92---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 91 
available on the website. Applicants who did not ask questions when there was little 
information available were perceived as less conscientious than those who neglected to 
ask questions when there was more information available. Although these differences 
based on amount of information on the website were unexpected when applicants did not 
ask questions, they do make sense. Conscientious individuals are achievement driven, 
organized, and plan their pursuits. When there is little information available, 
conscientious individuals might be expected to ask questions to (1) help them determine 
whether they want the job and (2) better plan for the future. However, if the interviewer 
knows there is a lot of information already available to the applicant about the job, the 
interviewer could infer that the applicant has already done their due diligence and 
answered any questions on their own prior to the interview. In other words, perhaps not 
asking questions when there is information already available is not an automatic strike 
against one’s perceived conscientiousness. Another unexpected finding was that there 
was no difference in perceived conscientiousness between those who asked questions not 
answered on the website and those who asked questions answered on the website. This 
suggests that asking any sort of job-related question is enough to show that an applicant 
is achievement driven and conscientious.  
The relationships that emerged for perceived preparation of the applicant for the 
interview were similar to those that emerged for conscientiousness of the applicant. 
Again, applicants who did not ask questions when more information was available on the 
website could not be combined with applicants who did not ask questions when there was 
less information available on the website due to differences in perceived preparation for 
the interview between these groups. Those who failed to ask questions when there was 
---PAGE 93---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 92 
less information on the website were perceived as less prepared for the interview than 
those who did not ask questions when there was more information on the website. The 
explanations for the conscientiousness results apply to this situation as well. When more 
information was available on the website, applicants who did not ask questions may be 
perceived as more prepared if the interviewers infer that the applicant reviewed the 
website and the information found there did a sufficient job of answering any questions 
they may have had. On the other hand, in the absence of detailed information, a more 
prepared applicant would have seen that there was a lot of information left to be learned, 
and prepared by formulating some questions to ascertain that information. The 
similarities between conscientiousness and preparation for the interview are interesting 
considering that increased preparation for the interview might be considered a 
characteristic expected of someone who is more conscientious. In this way, it makes 
sense that there would be similarities in the results regarding preparation and 
conscientiousness.  
Unlike all other results, for interest in the job, it not only mattered whether or not 
applicants asked questions, but when questions were asked, it also mattered whether that 
question could have been answered on the website or not. The same relationships found 
for applicant’s interest in the job was also hypothesized but not supported for applicant 
motivation. An investigation of the items included on these scales provides some insight. 
While the items contained on the motivation scale were more about impressing the 
interviewer and securing a job offer, the interest in the job items were more learning 
oriented (e.g., “the applicant seemed eager to learn about the job” and “the applicant 
seemed curious about the job”). It makes sense then, that someone who asked novel 
---PAGE 94---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 93 
questions that could not have been answered elsewhere would be perceived as more 
genuinely interested and curious about the job than someone asking questions that, had 
they been truly interested, they could have found out prior to the interview.  
Apart from the attributions interviewers make about applicants, the hiring ratings 
given to applicants were also examined. While asking questions or not asking questions 
did not seem to impact the hiring ratings made by the interviewer, applicants who had 
portrayed high qualifications via their interview performance were given more favorable 
hiring ratings than those who portrayed marginal qualifications through their interview 
performance. What this suggests is that despite feeling differently about the applicants in 
terms of their characteristics such as P-O fit, conscientiousness, extraversion, openness to 
experience, motivation, preparation, and interest in the job based on questions asked, 
asking or not asking questions did not impact interviewers’ ultimate hiring ratings of the 
applicant. From a character standpoint, an applicant has something to gain by asking 
quality questions of the interviewer, but our findings suggest that applicants should not 
expect those questions to sway the ultimate hiring decision more than interview 
performance already does.  
This does not mean that the interviewer’s perceptions of applicant characteristics 
do not relate to hiring ratings at all, though. In both Studies 1 and 2, P-O fit, 
conscientiousness, and motivation were the strongest predictors of hiring ratings of the 
attributions examined. Of the personality characteristics, it is no surprise that 
conscientiousness has the strongest relationship with hiring ratings. This aligns with prior 
research showing just that (Dunn et al., 1995). Motivation, too, has been highly correlated 
---PAGE 95---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 94 
with the rated hirability of applicants in the past as well (Gifford, Ng, & Wilkerson, 
1985). 
Finally, as in Study 1, questions that could not have been answered on the website 
(M = 5.16, SD = 1.49) were perceived as better questions than those that could have been 
answered on the website (M = 4.27, SD = 1.67), t (117) = 3.08, p < .01, d = .56. Yet, 
even though the questions asked were perceived more or less favorably depending on 
whether they could have been answered on the website in advance, there were no 
differences in the characteristics attributed to applicants with the exception of interest in 
the job. Again, it would seem that although an applicant might ask “better” or “worse” 
questions of the interviewer, the relative quality of the question in most cases had no 
bearing on interviewers’ perceptions of the applicant. What really seems to matter in 
most cases is simply whether questions were asked at all.  
Overall Discussion 
When it comes to understanding how applicants questions, lack of questions, or 
quality of questions affect ratings of the applicant and interview outcomes, there are 
currently more questions than answers. The limited amount of scientifically supported 
research findings, however, has not stopped the authors of interviewing coaching 
materials and articles on career building websites from freely offering their opinions 
concerning what applicants should and should not ask. Given the prevalence of this 
subject matter in mainstream interviewing publications, there is clearly a demand for this 
type of information, and thus a need to build up our repertoire of knowledge in this area 
by conducting research on this increasingly ubiquitous part of the interview process. 
---PAGE 96---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 95 
The current research responded to this need for research by adding to existing 
knowledge in three major ways by: (1) presenting a process model to organize and drive 
future research, (2) creating a broader understanding of how applicant questions influence 
the attributions made about the applicants depending on the availability of answers prior 
to the interview as well as expectations for questions, and (3) determining whether the 
effect of applicant questions on hiring ratings differs depending on applicant 
qualifications and applicant interview performance. 
First, a process model of the applicant questioning process was presented, 
beginning with factors likely impacting the decision to ask questions and concluding with 
the ultimate effects on applicant attributions and hiring ratings, while also including four 
categories of moderating variables likely to affect outcomes. This model can not only aid 
researchers in identifying the topics still in need of exploration, but can also help 
researchers identify and better organize the variables they decide are important to include 
in their own research. While the model is inclusive of the major themes and topic areas 
involved in applicant questioning, it is not exhaustive and leaves room for others to 
expand upon it as they see fit. 
As applicants broach the job interview, they may wonder what exactly they 
should ask. Answering this question is not as simple as it seems. The present studies 
attempted to broaden our views of what makes a good or bad question beyond just 
content to include other variables likely to influence the positivity or negativity with 
which a question is received. These variables included whether the questions could have 
been answered prior to the interview, and whether interviewers believe that questions 
should or should not be asked, all while holding content constant. Based on this research, 
---PAGE 97---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 96 
while questions that could have been answered prior to the interview were perceived as 
lower quality questions than novel questions the applicant could not have answered in 
advance, this did not necessarily have much bearing on the attributions made about the 
applicant. Asking questions (whether the answer was available to the applicant pre-
interview or not) was enough to be perceive applicants as have greater P-O fit, and being 
more extraverted, open to experiences, motivated, and interested in the job than those not 
asking questions. However, the amount of information available on the website (answer 
availability), also affected interest in the job, in addition to conscientiousness and 
preparation. 
It is important to consider the effect sizes of these analyses and not just the 
statistical significance considering the increased risk of Type I Error due to the large 
number of analyses performed. While effect sizes for asking questions versus not asking 
questions tended to be medium to large, when there were differences between asking 
questions answered on the website and not answered on the website the effect sizes 
tended to be much smaller. This is in line with Taylor, Friedman, and Coolsen (2013), 
who found relatively small effects of applicant questions on interview ratings using well-
qualified applicants.  
Interestingly, Study 1 and Study 2’s results did not align for all dependent 
variables, although we hypothesized that they would. In Study 1 no significant 
relationships existed for conscientiousness, motivation, or preparation for the interview, 
while there were significant relationships for all three of these variables in Study 2. 
Additionally, in Study 1 applicants who asked questions were perceived as more 
interested in the job than applicants who did not ask questions. This relationship was 
---PAGE 98---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 97 
present in Study 2, but there was also a difference between applicants who asked 
questions not answered on the website and applicants who asked questions answered on 
the website. For two of the personality characteristics, in Study 1 applicants who asked 
questions not answered on the website were perceived as more extraverted and open to 
experience than those who asked no questions, while in Study 2 applicants who asked 
any type of question were perceived as more extraverted and open to experience than 
those who asked no questions. Overall, more differences were found in Study 2 than 
Study 1. This is likely due, in part, to the fact that means tended to be higher and less 
varied between conditions in Study 1 (when interview performance portrayed a highly 
qualified applicant and résumé qualifications varied) than means in Study 2 (when 
résumé qualifications were high and interview performance varied). While the only 
hypotheses to specifically examine the effects of applicants qualifications together with 
whether or not they asked questions were those examining their effects on hiring ratings, 
additional analyses revealed that those applicants whose interview performance portrayed 
them as well qualified were perceived higher for every applicant attribution studied than 
those whose interview performance portrayed them as marginally qualified. On the 
contrary, there were no differences in ratings when examining qualified résumés versus 
marginal résumés, holding interview performance consistently well qualified. These 
findings suggest that how the applicant answers interview questions (i.e. interview 
performance) has a larger impact on interview outcomes than the questions applicants ask 
and résumé qualifications.  
 Limitations. One potential limitation of this study is the use of students as 
interviewers. Although students had to be employed to participate, their experience 
---PAGE 99---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 98 
actually conducting job interviews may be more limited than one would find by sampling 
individuals in an organization. In this sample, 75% indicated that they never conduct 
employment interviews, 16% rarely conduct them, 6% sometimes conduct them, and 3% 
indicated that they frequently or primarily conduct interviews as part of their job. There 
were no significant differences in the hiring ratings given to applicants based upon how 
frequently they conduct employment interview for Study 1 and Study 2. Thus, there was 
no evidence that applicants would have been rated any differently if more experienced 
interviewers rated them. 
Another potential limitation could be the strength of the manipulations in our 
study. In the real world, interviewers, especially when the interviewer will be the boss of 
the candidate being interviewed, should be a lot more intimately familiar with the 
information on the job description as well as the information available on the company 
website. In this situation, our participants playing the role of the interviewer were given 
limited time to learn about the position, and may not have remembered everything that 
was described on the program description. Although we made every effort to ensure that 
participants were familiar enough with the website content that they would realize if the 
applicant’s questions could have been answered before the interview or not, given that 
there were not as many differences as expected between those who asked questions that 
could have been answered on the website and those who asked questions that could not 
have been answered, it may be that this distinction was not as clear as it could have been. 
On the other hand, the lack of differences could be reflective of an actual trend that 
whether the questions asked about novel information is not as important as the distinction 
between asking questions and not asking questions when they are job-related. Again, this 
---PAGE 100---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 99 
would make sense as it would seem that participants did perceive a difference in question 
quality depending on whether questions could have been answered in advance or not, but 
yet did not expect either of the two groups to know the answers to the questions they 
asked more so than the other group.  
A final limitation of this study deals with its design. In a between-subjects design, 
each participant evaluates only one job applicant instead of comparing multiple 
applicants to each other, as would be done in an actual employment setting.  Thus, 
findings from this study may be conservative in that larger effects would be expected 
from within subject designs, in which the interviewer could compare an applicant who 
asked questions to an applicant who did not ask questions, while holding everything else 
constant. However, setting up the study in a within-subjects fashion would have also 
made the variables of interest (applicant questioning) more salient, making it easier for 
participants to guess the intent of the study.  
Future Directions. The results of Studies 1 and 2 suggest that not only does 
applicant interview performance affect the attributions made about the applicant 
including perceived personality traits, but the questions applicants ask influence how 
interviewers perceive them as well. Future research should investigate whether the self 
reported interest in the job, preparation for the interview, motivation, and personality 
traits differ depending on whether applicants ask questions, and if so, whether those 
questions could have been answered prior to the interview. 
Beyond the results of Studies 1 and 2, the proposed process model of applicant 
questions illustrates the enormity of possibilities for future directions. While the studies 
here focused on particular aspects of the second and third parts of the process model, it 
---PAGE 101---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 100 
would still be beneficial to understand the variables that affect why applicants decide to 
ask questions initially, and what drives them to ask the questions they do.  
In addition, more research will also be needed on the variables affecting outcomes 
of applicant questioning. While these present studies begin to investigate factors outside 
of content that make a question more positively or less positively received, future 
research should continue to investigate such variables (e.g., various interview, applicant, 
question, and interviewer characteristics) that may contribute to ratings of the applicant 
based on applicant questions. Of particular importance due to the fact that it is often 
discussed in interview coaching materials is whether applicants should wait until the 
interviewer asks for questions, or show initiative by asking the questions before they are 
specifically solicited.  
Conclusion 
Whether or not applicants should ask questions is a hot topic buzzing with 
discussion in the media. Yet, relatively little of the advice is supported by empirical 
research. The lack of information known about this important part of the interview 
presents an exciting new avenue for research. This research described a process model of 
applicant questioning behaviors drawn from various disciplines that may be used to direct 
future research on applicant questions. The two studies focused on how a few of those 
variables, namely asking or not asking questions, whether the answers to these questions 
were available prior to the interview, and interviewer beliefs about whether applicants 
should ask questions affect attributions made about the applicant. It appears that the 
questions applicants ask can indeed affect the attributions we make about applicants, but 
do not appear to affect hiring ratings directly. Finally, this research also investigated the 
---PAGE 102---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 101 
impact applicant questions may have when considering more or less qualified applicants 
and those with strong or weaker interview performance. While interview qualifications 
alone affects hiring ratings, they do not interact with applicant questions to affect them. 
However, more so than the questions applicants ask, how applicants answer interview 
questions (i.e. interview performance) has a greater influence on interview outcomes and 
attributions made about the applicants. The information learned here and in other studies 
yet to come on applicant questioning behaviors has implications for both research and 
practice. Information in this area not only helps inform researchers’ understandings of the 
complex array of variables involved in determining applicant evaluations and interview 
outcomes, but will also start to provide evidential backing to support (or fail to support) 
advice offered to applicants regarding successful interviewing behaviors. Here we see 
that persistent advice to ask questions to help an applicant get a job offer may not have a 
profound impact above and beyond interview performance. However, more research is 
needed investigating other aspects of applicant questioning behaviors to paint a more 
complete picture of their effects on getting hired.  
---PAGE 103---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 102 
References 
Adler, O. (2008) Sell Yourself in Any Interview: Use Proven Sales Techniques to Land 
Your Dream Job. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional Publishing. 
Aitken, J. E., & Neer, M. R. (1993). College student question-asking: The relationship of 
classroom communication apprehension and motivation. The Southern 
Communication Journal, 59(1), 73-81. 
Amalfitano, J. G., & Kalt, N. C. (1977). Effects of eye contact on the evaluation of job 
applicants. Journal of Employment Counseling, 14, 46-48. 
Anderson, N. R. (1992). Eight decades of employment interview research: A 
retrospective meta-review and prospective commentary. European Work and 
Organizational Psychologist, 2, 1-32. 
Anderson, N. R., Silvester, J., Cunningham-Snell, N., & Haddleton, E. (1999). 
Relationships between candidate self-monitoring, perceives personality, and 
selection interview outcomes. Human Relations, 52(9), 1115-1131.  
Argyle, M., Furnham, A., & Graham, J. A. (1981). Social Situations. Cambridge, 
England: Cambridge University Press. 
Ashford, S. J. (1986). Feedback-seeking in individual adaptation: A resource perspective. 
Academy of Management Journal, 26(3), 465-487. 
Ashford, S. J., & Cummings, L. L. (1985). Proactive feedback seeking: The instrumental 
use of the information environment. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 58, 67-
79. 
---PAGE 104---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 103 
Babbitt, L. V., & Jablin, F. M. (1985). Characteristics of applicants’ questions and 
employment screening interview outcomes. Human Communication Research, 
11(4), 507-535. 
Barbee, J. R., & Keil, E. C. (1973). Experimental techniques of job interview training for 
the disadvantaged: Videotape feedback, behavior modification, and 
microcounseling. Journal of Applied Psychology, 58, 209-213. 
Barber, A. E., Hollenbeck, J. R., Tower, S. L., & Phillips, J. M. (1994). The effects of 
interview focus on recruitment effectiveness: A field experiment. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 79(6), 886-896. 
Barrick, M. R., & Mount, M. K. (1991). The big five personality dimensions and job 
performance: A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 44, 1-25. 
Barrick, M. R., Patton, G. K., & Haugland, S. N. (2000). Accuracy of interviewer 
judgments of job applicant personality traits. Personnel Psychology, 53, 925-951. 
Barrick, M. R., Shaffer, J. A., & DeGrassi, S. W. (2009). What you see may not be what 
you get: Relationships among self-presentation tactics and ratings of interview 
and job performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(6), 1394-1411. DOI: 
10.1037/a0016532 
Barrick, M. R., Swider, B. W., & Stewart, G. L. (2010). Evaluations in the interview: 
relationships with subsequent interviewer evaluations and employment offers. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 95(6), 1163-1172. DOI: 10.1037/a0019918 
Baskett, G. (1973). Interview decisions as determined by competency and attitude 
similarity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 57(3), 343-345. 
---PAGE 105---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 104 
Beatty, M. J. (1987). Communication apprehension as a determinant of avoidance, 
withdrawal and performance anxiety. Communication Quarterly, 35(2), 202-217. 
Berlyne, D. E. (1974). Verbal and exploratory responses to visual patterns varying in 
uncertainty and in redundancy. In D. E. Berlyne (Ed.), Studies in the New 
Experimental Aesthetics (pp. 121-158). Washington, DC: Hemisphere. 
Berry, C. M., Sackett, P. R., & Landers, R. N. (2007). Revisiting interview-cognitive 
ability relationships: Attending to specific range restriction mechanisms in meta-
analysis. Personnel Psychology, 60, 836-874. 
Brannick, M. T., & Levine, E. L. (2012). Job analysis: Methods, research, and 
applications for human resource management in the new millennium. Thousand 
Oaks, California: Sage Publications, Inc. 
Breaugh, J. A. (2012). Employee recruitment: Current knowledge and suggestions for 
future research. In N. Schmitt (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Personnel 
Assessment and Selection, (pp. 68-87). NT: Oxford University Press. 
Bretz, R. D., Rynes, S. L., & Gerhart, B. (1993). Recruiter perceptions of applicant fit: 
Implications for individual career preparation and job search behavior. Journal of 
Vocational Behavior, 43, 310-327. 
Brown, B. K., & Campion, M. A (1994). Biodata phenomenology: Recruiters’ 
perceptions and use of biographical information in résumé screening. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 79, 897-901.  
Burgoon, J K., Stern, L. A., & Dillman, L (1995). Interpersonal adaptation. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Byrne, D. (1971). The attraction paradigm. New York: Academic Press. 
---PAGE 106---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 105 
Cable, D. M., & DeRue, D. S. (2002). The convergent and discriminant validity of 
subjective fit perceptions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(5), 875-884. 
Cable, D. M., & Judge, T. A. (1997). Interviewers’ perceptions of person-organization fit 
and organizational selection decisions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 547-
561. 
Caldwell, D. M., & Burger, J. M. (1998). Personality characteristics of job applicants and 
success in screening interviews. Personnel Psychology, 51, 119-136.  
Campbell, J. P., Dunnette, M. D., Arvey, R. D., and Hellervik, L. V. (1973). The 
development and evaluation of behaviorally based rating scales. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 57(1), 15-22. 
Campion, M. A., Palmer, D. K., & Campion, J. E. (1997). A review of structure in the 
selection interview. Personnel Psychology, 50, 655-702. 
Campion, M. A., Pursell, E. D., & Brown, B. K. (1988). Structured interviewing: Raising 
the psychometric properties of the employment interview. Personnel Psychology, 
41, 25-42. 
Chen, G. Casper, W. J., & Cortina, J. M. (2001). The roles of self-efficacy and task 
complexity in the relationships among cognitive ability, conscientiousness, and 
work-related performance: A meta-analytic examination. Human Performance, 
14(3), 209-230. 
Coelimeyer, M., & Berchtold, I. M. (1982). Getting the job: How to interview 
successfully. New York: Petrocelli Books. 
Cohen, M. (1991). Making class participation a reality. PS: Political Science and 
Politics, 24, 699-703. 
---PAGE 107---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 106 
Cole, M. S., Field, H. S., Giles, W. F., & Harris, S. G. (2004). Job type and recruiters’ 
inferences of applicant personality drawn from biodata: Their relationships with 
hiring recommendations. International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 
12(4), 363-367. 
Cook, K. W., Vance, C. A., & Spector, P. E. (2000). The relation of candidate personality 
with selection-interview outcomes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 30(4), 867-
885. 
Costa, P. T. Jr, & McCrae, R. R. (1988). From catalog to classification: Murray’s needs 
and the five factor model. Journal of Personality Social Psychology, 55, 258-265. 
Crone, J. A. (1997). Using panel debates to increase student involvement in the 
introductory sociology class. Teaching Sociology, 25, 214-218. 
Crozier, J. B. (1974). Verbal and exploratory responses to sound sequences varying in 
uncertainty level. In D. E. Berlyne (Ed.), Studies in the New Experimental 
Aesthetics (pp. 27-90). Washington, D. C: Hemisphere Publishing Corporation. 
Dalessio, A., & Imada, A. (1984). Relationships between interview selection decisions 
and perceptions of applicant similarity to an ideal employee and self: A field 
study. Human Relations, 37(1), 67-80. 
DeGroot, T., & Motowildo, S. J. (1999). Why visual and vocal cues can affect 
interviewers’ judgments and predict job performance. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 84(6), 986-993. 
DeLuca, M., & DeLuca, N. (2004). 24 Hours to the Perfect Interview: Quick Steps for 
Planning, Organizing, & Preparing for the Interview that Gets the Job! New 
York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
---PAGE 108---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 107 
DeShon, R. P., & Alexander, R. A. (1996). Goal setting effects on implicit and explicit 
learning of complex tasks. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 65, 18-36. 
Diefendorff, J. M., & Chandler, M. M. (2010). Motivating employees. In S. Zedeck (Ed.). 
Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology (pp. 65-135). 
Washington, D. C: American Psychological Association. 
Dipboye, R. E., & Macan, T. M. (1988). A process view of the selection/recruitment 
interview. In R. S. Schuler, S. A. Yougblood and V. L. Huber (Eds.), Readings in 
Personnel and Human Resource Management, MN: West Publishing Co. 
Dipboye, R. E., Macan, T., & Shahani-Denning, C. (2012). The selection interview from 
the interviewer and applicant perspectives: Can’t have one without the other. N. 
Schmitt (Ed.) The Oxford Handbook of Personnel Assessment and Selection. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
Dunn, W. S., Mount, M. K., Barrick, M. R., & Ones, D. S. (1995) Relative importance of 
personality and general and mental ability in managers’ judgment of applicant 
qualifications. Journal of Applied Psychology, 80, 500-509. 
Edinger, J. A., & Patterson, M. L. (1983). Nonverbal involvement and social control.  
Psychological Bulletin, 93, 30-56. 
Einhorn, L. J. (1981) An inner view of the job interview: An investigation of successful 
communicative behaviors. Communication Education, 30, 217-228. 
Evans, D. R. (1971). The Ontario test of intrinsic motivation, question asking, and 
autistic thinking. Psychological Reports, 29, 154. 
---PAGE 109---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 108 
Fassinger, P.A. (1995). Professors; and students’ perceptions of why students participate 
in class. Teaching Sociology, 24, 25-33. 
Fiegerman, S. (2011, February 28). 6 questions to ask in a job interview. Yahoo Finance. 
Retrieved from 
http://finance.yahoo.com/news/financially_fit_article_112170.html 
Figler, H. E. (1980). The complete job-search handbook. New York: Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston. 
Flanagan, J. C. (1954). The critical incident technique. Psychological Bulletin, 51(4), 
327-359. 
Fletcher, C. (1990). The relationships between candidate personality, self-presentation 
strategies, and interviewer assessments in selection interviews: An empirical 
study. Human Relations, 43, 739-749. 
Forbes, R. J., & Jackson, P. R. (1980). Nonverbal behavior and the outcome of selection 
interviews. Journal of Occupational Psychology, 53, 65-72. 
Fry, R. (2009). 101 Smart Questions to Ask on your Interview. Boston, Massachusetts: 
Course Technology/Cenage Learning. 
Funder, D. C., West, S. G. Viewpoints on personality: Consensus, self-other agreement, 
and accuracy in personality judgment. Journal of Personality, 61(4), 457-807. 
Gifford, R., Ng, C. F., & Wilkinson, M. (1985). Nonverbal cues in the employment 
interview: Links between applicant qualities and interviewer judgments. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 70(4), 729-736. 
---PAGE 110---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 109 
Goldberg, C. B. (2005). Relational demography and similarity-attraction in interview 
assessments and subsequent offer decisions. Group and Organizational 
Management, 30(6), 597-624. 
Goldberg, C., & Cohen, D. J. (2004). Walking the walk and talking the talk: Gender 
differences in the impact of interviewing skills on applicant assessments. Group 
& Organization Management, 29(3), 367-384. DOI: 10.1177/1059601103257408. 
Green, A. (2012, April 18). The 10 best interview questions to ask. Yahoo Finance. 
Retrieved from http://finance.yahoo.com/news/10-best-interview-questions-ask-
130422407.html 
Griffitt, W., & Jackson, T. (1970). Influence of information about ability and non-ability 
on personnel selection decisions. Psychological Reports, 27, 959-962. 
Hall, J. A., Coats, E. J., Smith-LeBeau, L. (2005). Nonverbal behavior and the vertical 
dimension of social relations: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 131(6), 
898-924. 
Herriot, P. (1989). Selection as a social process. In Smith, M., & I. T. Roberrson (Eds.),  
Advances in Selection and Assessment, (pp. 171-187). Chichester: Wiley. 
Hollandsworth, J. G., Kazelskis, R., Stevens, J., Dressel, M. E. (1979). Relative 
contribution of verbal, articulate, and nonverbal communication to employment 
decisions in the job interview setting. Personnel Psychology, 32(2), 359-367. 
Hosada, M., Stone-Romero, E. F., Coats, G. (2003). The effects of physical attractiveness 
on job related outcomes: A meta-analysis of experimental studies. Personnel 
Psychology, 56, 431-462. 
---PAGE 111---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 110 
Howard, J., & Ferris, G. (1996). The employment interview context: Social and 
situational influences on interviewer decisions. Journal of Applied and Social 
Psychology, 26, 112-136. 
Huffcutt, A. L., Roth, R., & McDaniel, M. (1996). A meta-analytic investigation of 
cognitive ability in employment and implications for incremental validity. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 81, 459-473. 
John, O. P., Donahue, E. M., & Kentle, R. L. (1991). The Big Five Inventory--Versions 
4a and 54. Berkeley, CA: University of California, Berkeley, Institute of 
Personality and Social Research. 
Johnson, D. (2012, February 15). 5 things you should never say in a job interview. CBS 
Money Watch. Retrieved from http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-505143_162-
57378014/5-things-you-should-never-say-in-a-job-interview/ 
Kacmar, K. M., Delery, J. E., & Ferris, G. R. (1992). Differential effectiveness of 
applicant impression management tactics on employment interview decisions. 
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 22, 1250-1272. 
Kador, J. (2010). 301 Best Questions to Ask on Your Interview. New York, New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 
Kanfer, R., & Ackerman, P. L. (1989). Motivation and cognitive abilities: An 
integrative/aptitude-treatment interaction approach to skill acquisition. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 74, 657-690. 
Kashdan, T. B., & Silva, P. J. (2009). Curiosity and interest: The benefits of thriving on 
novelty and challenge. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Oxford Handbook of 
---PAGE 112---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 111 
Positive Psychology, (pp. 367-374). New York, New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Kimble, C. E., & Seidel, S. D. (1991). Vocal signs of confidence. Journal of Nonverbal  
Behavior, 15(2), 99-105. 
Kirkpatrick, S. A., & Locke, E. A. (1991). Leadership: Do traits matter? Academy of 
Management Executive, 5(2), 48-60. 
Kristof-Brown, A. L. (2006) Perceived applicant fit: Distinguishing between recruiters’ 
perceptions of person-job and person-organization fit. Personnel Psychology, 
53(3), 643-671. 
Kristof-Brown, A. L., Barrick, M. R., & Franke, M. (2002). Applicant impression 
management: Dispositional influences and consequences for recruiter perceptions 
of fit and similarity. .Journal of Management, 28, 27–46. 
Lazarus, R. S., & Averill, J. R. (1972). Emotion and cognition: With special reference to 
anxiety. In C. D. Spielberger (Ed.), Anxiety: Current trends in theory and 
research (Vol. 2, pp. 242–284). New York: Academic Press. 
Levine, S. P., & Feldman, R. S. (2002). Women and men’s nonverbal behavior and self-
monitoring in a job interview setting. Applied H.R.M. Research, 7(1), 1-14.  
Levit, A. (2009). New job, new you: A guide to reinventing yourself in a bright new 
career. New York, New York: Ballantine Books. 
Lin, T., Dobbins, G., & Farh, J. (1992). A field study of race and age similarity effect on 
interview ratings in conventional and situational interview. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 77(3), 363-371. 
Litman, J. A. (2005). Curiosity and the pleasures of learning: Wanting and liking new 
---PAGE 113---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 112 
information. Cognition and Emotion, 19, 793-814. 
Macan, T. H., & Dipboye, R L. (1988). The effects of interviewers’ initial impressions on 
information gathering, Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 
42, 364-387. 
Macan, T., & Merritt, S. (2011). Actions speak too: Uncovering possible implicit and 
explicit discrimination in the employment interview process. In G. P. Hodkinson 
& J. K. Ford (Eds.), International Review of Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology 2011, Volume 26 (pp. 293-337). West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.  
McCarthy, J., & Goffin, R. (2004). Measuring job interview anxiety: Beyond weak knees 
and sweaty palms. Personnel Psychology, 57, 607-637. 
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. Jr. (1985) Openness to experience. In Hogan, R. and W. H. 
Jones (Eds.), Perspectives in Personality (Vol 1, pp. 145-172). Greenwich, CT: 
JAI Press. 
McCroskey, J. C. (1977). Oral communication apprehension: A summary of recent 
theory and research. Human Communication Research, 4, 78-96. 
McCroskey, J. C. (1984). The communication apprehension perspective. In Daly, J. A., & 
J. C. McCroskey (Eds.), Avoiding Communication: Shyness, Reticence, and 
Communication Apprehension (pp.13-38). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.  
McGovern, T. V., & Tensley, H. E. (1978). Interviewer evaluations of interviewee 
nonverbal behavior. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 13(2), 163-171. 
Medley, H. A. (1978). Sweaty palms: The neglected art of being interviewed. Belmont, 
CA: Lifetime Learning Publications. 
---PAGE 114---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 113 
Merman, S. K., & McLaughlin, J. E. (1983). Out interviewing the interviewer. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Moreira, P. (2002) Ace the IT Job Interview. Backlick, Ohio: McGraw-Hill Professional 
Publishing. 
Neer, M. R. (1987). The development of an instrument to measure classroom 
apprehension. Communication Education, 37, 154-166. 
Neer, M. R., & Kircher, W. F. (1989). Apprehensive perception of classroom factors 
influencing their class participation. Communication Research Reports, 6, 70-77. 
Newman, L. S., Uleman, J. S. (1989). Spontaneous trait inference. In J. S. Uleman & J. 
A. Bargh (Eds.), Unintended Thought (pp.155-188). New York: Guilford. 
Nickerson, R. S. (1998). Confirmation bias: A ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises. 
Review of General Psychology, 2, 175-220. 
O’Leary, B. J., Durham, C. R., Weathington, B. L., Cothran, D. L., & Cunningham, C. J. 
L. (2009). Race identity as a moderator of the relationship between perceived 
applicant similarity and hiring decisions. Journal of Black Psychology, 351, 63-
77. 
Peters, R. A. (1978). Effects of anxiety, curiosity, and perceived instructor threat on 
student verbal behavior in the college classroom. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 70(3), 388-395. 
Peters, L., & Terborg, J. (1975). The effects of temporal placement of unfavorable 
information and of attitude similarity on personal selection decisions. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 13, 279-293. 
---PAGE 115---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 114 
Peterson, M. S. (1997). Personnel interviewers’ perceptions of the importance and 
adequacy of applicants’ communication skills. Communication Education, 46(4), 
287-291. 
Peterson, T. (n.d.). Your turn to ask questions. Monster Career Advice. Retrieved from  
http://career-advice.monster.com/job-interview/interview-questions/your-turn-to-
ask-questions/article.aspx 
Proost, K., Schreurs, B., DeWitte, K., & Derous, E. (2010). Ingratiation and self-
promotion in the selection interview: The effects of using single tactics or a 
combination of tactics on interviewer judgments. Journal of Applied Social 
Psychology, 40(9), 2155-2169. 
Reio Jr., T. G., & Wiswell, A. (2001). Field investigation of the relationship among adult 
curiosity, workplace learning, and job performance. Human Resource 
Development Quarterly, 11(1), 5-30. 
Rynes, S. L. (1989). The employment interview as a recruitment device. In R. W. Eder & 
G. R. Ferris (Eds.), The Employment Interview: Theory, Research, and Practice 
(pp. 127-142). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.  
Schwab, D. P., Heneman III, H. G., & DeCotiis, T. A. (1975). Behaviorally anchored 
rating scales: A review of the literature. Personnel Psychology, 28, 549-562.  
Scherer, K. R., & Giles, H. (1979). Social Markers in Speech. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, Scherer, K. R., London, H., and Wolfe, J. J. (1973). The voice 
of confidence: Paralinguistic cues and audience evaluation. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 7, 31-44. 
---PAGE 116---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 115 
Schmidt, F. L. (2011). The role of general cognitive ability and job performance: Why 
there cannot be a debate. Human Performance, 15(1-2), 187-210. 
Schmitt, N. & Coyle, B. W. (1976). Applicant decisions in the employment interview. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 61(2), 184-192. 
Sears, G., & Rowe, P. M. (2003). Personality-based similar-to-me effect in the 
employment Interview: Conscientiousness, affect- versus competence-mediated 
interpretations, and the role of job relevance. Canadian Journal of Behavioral 
Science, 35(1), 13-24. 
Shapiro, C. (2008). What Does Somebody Have to Do to Get a Job Around Here? 44  
Insider Secrets and Tips that will Get You Hired. New York, New York: St. 
Martin’s Griffin. 
Smith, P. C., Kendall, L. M. (1963). Retranslation of expectations: An approach to the 
construction of unambiguous anchors for rating scales. Journal of Applies 
Psychology, 47(2), 194-155. 
Snyder, M. (1974). Self-monitoring of expressive behavior. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 30(4), 526-537. 
Spence, M. (1973). Job market signaling. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87, 355-374. 
 Stevens, C. K. & Kristof, A. L. (1995). Making the right impression: A field study of 
applicant impressions during job interviews. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
80(5), 587-606. 
Tay, C., Ang, S., & Van Dyne, L. (2006). Personality, biographical characteristics, and 
job interview success: A longitudinal study of the mediating effects of 
---PAGE 117---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 116 
interviewing self-efficacy and the moderating effects of internal locus of 
causality. 
Taylor, V. F., Coolsen, M. K., & Reese, D. (2010). What did you ask? An empirical 
investigation of the influence of applicant questions. In Oglesby, R. A., and 
Leblanc III, H. P. (Eds.) Business Research Yearbook: Global Business 
Perspectives, 27(1) (pp. 394-401). Beltsville, MD: International Academy of 
Business Development.  
Taylor, V. F., Friedman, B. A., & Coolsen, M. K. (2013). Exploring applicant questions 
in the employment interview: questions on applicant ratings and personality 
assessment. Manuscript submitted for publication. 
Tullar, W. L. (1989). The employment interview as a cognitive performing script. In  
Eder, R. W. & Ferris, G. R. (Eds.), The Employment Interview: Theory, Research, 
and Practice, (pp. 233-245). Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Van Iddekinge, C. H., McFarland, L. A., & Raymark, P. H. (2007). Antecedents of 
impression management use and effectiveness in a structured interview. Journal 
of Management, 33(5), 752-773. 
Wade, R. (1994). Teacher education students’ views on class discussions: Implications 
for fostering critical reflection. Teaching and Teacher Education, 10, 231-243. 
Washburn, P. V., & Hakel, M. D. (1973). Visual cues and verbal content as influences on 
impressions formed after simulated employment interviews. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 58(1), 137-141. 
---PAGE 118---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 117 
Wayne, S. J., & Kacmar, K. M. (1991). The effects of impression management on the 
performance appraisal process. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 48, 70-88. 
Williams, L. (2008). Ultimate Interview. London: Kogan Page Ltd. 
Young, D. M., & Beier, E. G. (1977). The role of applicant nonverbal communication in 
the employment interview. Journal of Employment Counseling, 14, 154-165. 
---PAGE 119---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT QUESTIONS ON INTERVIEW 118 
Figure 1. A process model of applicant questioning behavior
 Extent of Inquiry  
The number of questions 
the applicant asks  
Interviewer Attributions  
About the Applicant 
- P-O Fit 
- Personality 
o Extraversion 
o Conscientiousness 
o Openness 
- Motivation 
- Knowledge 
- Interest in the job 
- Preparation 
- Cognitive Ability 
 
Hiring 
Ratings 
Interviewer 
Characteristics: 
- Perceived: 
o Appropriateness 
of questions  
o Similarity/liking 
for the applicant  
- Experience 
conducting 
interviews 
- Expectation for 
questions 
- Position/role/ 
department 
- Evaluation of 
applicant at time of 
questions 
 
Question 
Characteristics: 
- Content 
- Structure 
- Length 
- Clarity 
- Verbal Style 
- Question 
combination 
- Question 
timing 
- Solicitation of 
question 
Pre-Questioning 
 Post-Questioning 
Moderating Variables 
Applicant Motives & 
Characteristics: 
- Motives: impression 
management, 
information seeking, 
redistribute power 
- Personality 
- Anxiety 
Applicant Questioning 
Situational Determinants: 
Related to the Applicant 
- Applicant perceptions of 
o Expected behaviors/ 
interviewing norms  
o interview 
performance 
o interviewer 
receptiveness to 
questions  
- Applicant confidence 
- Applicant comfort with 
the job/interviewer 
- Applicant preparation 
Related to the Interview 
- Purpose 
- Stage 
- Structure 
Interviewer Feedback: 
- Verbal 
- Nonverbal 
Applicant 
Characteristics: 
- Nonverbal 
behavior  
- Confidence 
Interview 
Characteristics: 
- Structure 
- Purpose 
- Stage 
Interview 
Characteristics: 
- Structure 
- Purpose 
- Stage 
---PAGE 120---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
119 
 
Figure 2. The effects of applicant questions and interviewers’ expectations for questions on their 
perceptions of applicant P-O Fit. When interviewers expect questions, applicants who ask 
questions were perceived as having greater P-O Fit than applicants who did not ask questions. 
When interviewers are open to questions, there is no difference between the three applicant 
question groups. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
P-O Fit
Expect Questions Open to Questions
---PAGE 121---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
120 
 
Figure 3. The effect of applicant questions on interviewers’ perceptions of applicant 
extraversion. Applicants who asked questions not answered on the website were perceived as 
statistically significantly more extraverted than applicants who did not ask questions. 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
Extraversion
---PAGE 122---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
121 
 
Figure 4. The effect of applicant questions on interviewers’ perceptions of applicant openness to 
experience. Applicants who asked questions not answered on the website were perceived by 
interviewers as statistically significantly more open to experience than those who asked no 
questions and applicants who asked questions that could have been answered on the website. 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
Openness to Experience
---PAGE 123---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
122 
 
Figure 5. The effect of applicant questions on interviewers’ perceptions of applicant 
conscientiousness. No significant differences were found between applicant question groups for 
conscientiousness. 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
Conscientiousness
---PAGE 124---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
123 
 
Figure 6. The effect of applicant questions on interviewers’ perceptions of applicant motivation. 
No significant differences were found between applicant question groups for motivation. 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
Motivation
---PAGE 125---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
124 
 
Figure 7. The effect of applicant questions on interviewers’ perceptions of applicant interest in 
the job. No significant differences were found between applicant question groups for interest in 
the job. 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
Interest in the Job
---PAGE 126---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
125 
 
Figure 8. The effect of applicant questions on interviewers’ perceptions of applicant 
preparedness for the interview. No significant differences were found between applicant question 
groups for preparation. 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
Preparation
---PAGE 127---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
126 
 
Figure 9. The effects of applicant questions and résumé qualifications on hiring ratings. No 
significant differences were found between applicant question groups or résumé qualifications 
for hiring ratings. 
 
 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
Hiring Ratings
Well Qualified Resume Marginally Qualified Resume
---PAGE 128---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
127 
 
Figure 10. The effect of applicant questions on interviewers’ perceptions of applicant P-O Fit. 
When interviewers expect questions, applicants who ask questions were perceived as having 
greater P-O Fit than applicants who did not ask questions. When interviewers are open to 
questions, there is no difference between the three applicant question groups. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
P-O Fit
Expect Questions Open to Questions
---PAGE 129---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
128 
 
Figure 11. The effect of applicant questions on interviewers’ perceptions of applicant 
extraversion. Applicants who asked questions were perceived as statistically significantly more 
extraverted than applicants who did not ask questions. 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
Extraversion
---PAGE 130---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
129 
 
Figure 12. The effect of applicant questions on interviewers’ perceptions of applicant openness 
to experience. Applicants who asked questions were perceived as statistically significantly more 
open to experience than applicants who did not ask questions. 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
Openness to Experience
---PAGE 131---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
130 
 
Figure 13. The effect of asking questions and amount of information available on interviewers’ 
perceptions of applicant conscientiousness. There was a significant interaction between amount 
of information available and applicant questions. When no questions were asked, interviewers 
exposed to the website with more information available rated applicants as more conscientious 
than those exposed to the website with less information on it. When less information was 
available, applicants who asked questions that could not have been answered were perceived as 
more conscientious than applicants who did not ask questions. 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Less Info More Info
Conscientiousness
Questions No Questions
---PAGE 132---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
131 
 
Figure 14. The effect of applicant questions on interviewers’ perceptions of applicant 
motivation. Applicants who asked questions were perceived as more motivated than applicants 
who asked no questions. 
  
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
Motivation
---PAGE 133---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
132 
 
Figure 15. The effect of applicant questions on interviewers’ perceptions of applicant interest in 
the job. There were significant differences found between all three applicant question groups. 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
Interest in the Job
---PAGE 134---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
133 
 
Figure 16. The effect of asking questions and amount of information available on interviewers’ 
perceptions of applicant preparation for the interview. There was a significant interaction 
between amount of information and applicant questions. When no questions were asked, 
interviewers exposed to the website with more information available rated applicants as more 
prepared than those exposed to the website with less information on it. When less information 
was available, applicants who asked questions that could have been answered were perceived as 
more prepared than applicants who did not ask questions. 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Less Info More Info
Preparation
Questions No Questions
---PAGE 135---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
134 
 
Figure 17. The effects of applicant questions and résumé qualifications on hiring ratings. There 
was a significant main effect of interview qualifications – applicants with well qualified 
interviews received better hiring ratings than applicants with marginally qualified interviews. 
  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Questions Not Answered Questions Answered No Questions
Hiring Ratings
Well Qualified Interview Marginally Qualified Interview
---PAGE 136---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
135 
Table 1  
 
Conditions of Participants Who Failed the Manipulation Check in Study 1 
 
Condition Number 
Removed 
Asks questions answered on the website – qualified résumé 7 
Asks questions answered on the website – marginal résumé 7 
Asks questions not answered on the website – qualified résumé 7 
Asks questions not answered on the website – marginal résumé 7 
Did not ask questions with more info on website – qualified résumé 6 
Did not ask questions with more info on website – marginal résumé 4 
Did not ask questions with less info on website – qualified résumé 4 
Did not ask questions with less info on website – marginal résumé 9 
 
  
---PAGE 137---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
136 
Table 2  
 
Description and Sample Sizes of Study 1 Conditions 
 
Condition ID Description n 
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
5 
 
 
6 
 
Well qualified, asks questions, less information on website (i.e., 
questions are not answered) 
 
Well qualified, asks questions, more information on website (i.e., 
questions are answered) 
 
Well qualified, does not ask questions 
      Well qualified, does not ask questions, more information on website 
      Well qualified, does not ask questions, less information on website 
 
Marginally qualified, asks questions, less information on website (i.e., 
questions are not answered on website) 
 
Marginally qualified, asks questions, more information on website (i.e., 
questions are answered on website) 
 
Marginally qualified, does not ask questions 
      Marginally qualified, does not ask questions, more information  
      Marginally qualified, does not ask questions, less information  
 
 
38 
 
 
  36 
 
 
45 
23 
  22 
 
40 
 
 
38 
 
 
41 
18 
23 
 
 
 
 
---PAGE 138---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
137 
Table 3  
 
Means, Standard Deviations, and Intercorrelations Among Study Variables for Study 1 
 
Measures M SD         
      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1) PO Fit 6.14  .87  (.91)               
2) Extraversion 4.81 1.17 .46**  (.88)             
3) Openness to Experience 4.92  .81 .53** .58**  (.79)           
4) Conscientiousness 5.88  .95 .75** .53** .62**  (.91)         
5) Preparation 5.62 1.10 .66** .43** .42** .64**  (.85)       
6) Motivation 5.73 1.05 .70** .58** .57** .65** .67**  (.85)     
7) Interest in the Job 5.65 1.30 .50** .50** .55** .46** .52** .64**  (.91)   
8) Applicant Confidence 5.72 1.23 .60** .56** .49** .62** .61** .59** .51**  (.85) 
9) Hiring Rating 5.74 1.23 .62** .40** .46** .61** .53** .58** .41** .39** 
10) Hiring Recommendation Item 1.58  .78 -.63** -.51** -.52** -.62** -.59** -.61** -.58** -.60** 
11) Expectation for Applicant Questions 2.30   .46  .04  .10   .05  .11  .06  .11  .08  .03 
12) Expectation for Preparation 7.40 5.17  <.01  - .01 - .03 - .01  <.01 - .03  .09 .20** 
13) Evaluation of Preparation 13.50  5.11  .12  .12 .15* .14* .16* .16*  .07 - .07 
14) Evaluation of Applicant Questions 5.32 1.40 .36** .30** .31** .27** .50** .35** .35** .38** 
15) Frequency Conducting Interviews 1.36  .79 -.25** - .05 - .07 -.16* -.20** -.17** - .06 - .11 
16) Interviewing Skills 2.16 1.21 -.19** - .11 - .08 -.15* - .10  -.13* - .02 - .11 
17) Number of Interviews Over Career 8.44 44.07 -.24** - .06 - .09 -.14* -.18** -.20** - .10  - .05 
18) Career Length 5.60  4.20  - .04  .09 - .09 - .03  <.01  - .04  <.01  .17* 
19) Gender 1.71  .46  .05  .03  .02  .01 - .01  .03  .04  .01 
20) Age 22.97 4.89 - .06 - .01 -.17** - .10  - .04 - .12 - .05  .04 
21) Ethnicity 2.89 1.20   .06 - .05 .14*  .06  .06  .06  .03 - .07 
Note. Internal consistency estimates on diagonal. **Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level *Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level. 
  
          
---PAGE 139---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
138 
 
Table 3 Continued  
 
Means, Standard Deviations, and Intercorrelations Among Study Variables for Study 1 
 
Measures M SD         
      9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
1) PO Fit 6.14  .87                 
2) Extraversion 4.81 1.17                 
3) Openness to Experience 4.92  .81                 
4) Conscientiousness 5.88  .95                 
5) Preparation 5.62 1.10                 
6) Motivation 5.73 1.05                 
7) Interest in the Job 5.65 1.30                 
8) Applicant Confidence 5.72 1.23                 
9) Hiring Rating 5.74 1.23  (.92)               
10) Hiring Recommendation Item 1.58  .78 -.57** --             
11) Expectation for Applicant Questions 2.30   .46 .21** - .08 --           
12) Expectation for Preparation 7.40 5.17 -.58** - .02 -.17*  (.79)         
13) Evaluation of Preparation 13.50  5.11 .66** - .12 .16* -.95**  (.82)       
14) Evaluation of Applicant Questions 5.32 1.40 - .02 -.24**  <.01 .30** -.19*  (.93)     
15) Frequency Conducting Interviews 1.36  .79 - .11 .15* - .05 - .02  .01 - .14 --   
16) Interviewing Skills 2.16 1.21 -.16* .14* - .06 - .01 <.01   - .02 .42** -- 
17) Number of Interviews Over Career 8.44 44.07 - .11 .18** - .08 - .05  .04 - .12 .60** .30** 
18) Career Length 5.60  4.20  - .04 - .03 - .07  .07 - .05  .05 .28** .21** 
19) Gender 1.71  .46  .02  .08  .05 - .03  .05  .04 - .05 - .08 
20) Age 22.97 4.89 - .09  .03 -.16*  .08 - .08  <.01 .24** .18** 
21) Ethnicity 2.89 1.20  - .06 - .07 - .01 .15* -.14*  <.01  .04  .08 
Note. Internal consistency estimates on diagonal **Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level *Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level. 
---PAGE 140---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
139 
Table 3 Continued  
 
Means, Standard Deviations, and Intercorrelations Among Study Variables for Study 1 
 
Measures M SD         
      17 18 19 20 21 
1) PO Fit 6.14  .87           
2) Extraversion 4.81 1.17           
3) Openness to Experience 4.92  .81           
4) Conscientiousness 5.88  .95           
5) Preparation 5.62 1.10           
6) Motivation 5.73 1.05           
7) Interest in the Job 5.65 1.30           
8) Applicant Confidence 5.72 1.23           
9) Hiring Rating 5.74 1.23           
10) Hiring Recommendation Item 1.58  .78           
11) Expectation for Applicant Questions 2.30   .46           
12) Expectation for Preparation 7.40 5.17           
13) Evaluation of Preparation 13.50  5.11           
14) Evaluation of Applicant Questions 5.32 1.40           
15) Frequency Conducting Interviews 1.36  .79           
16) Interviewing Skills 2.16 1.21           
17) Number of Interviews Over Career 8.44 44.07 --         
18) Career Length 5.60  4.20  .25** --       
19) Gender 1.71  .46  .05 -.14* --     
20) Age 22.97 4.89 .21** .79** - .09 --   
21) Ethnicity 2.89 1.20   .02  .03 - .09 - .06  
Note. Internal consistency estimates on diagonal **Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level *Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level. 
  
  
---PAGE 141---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
140 
Table 4. Summary of Multiple Regression Analysis Study 1 
 
Variable B SEB β p 
Intercept -.23 .46  .62 
P-O Fit .35 .12 .25 * 
Preparation .09 .08 .08 .30 
Motivation .23 .10 .19 .02 
Interest <-.01 .06 -<.01 .98 
Extraversion -.01 .07 -.01 .89 
Conscientiousness .27 .11 .21 .01 
Openness to Experience .10 .11 .06 .38 
Note. B = unstandardized regression coefficient; SEB = standard error of the coefficient; β = 
standardized coefficient. ** is p < .001. * is p < .01 
  
---PAGE 142---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
141 
Table 5 
 
Conditions of Participants Who Failed the Manipulation Check in Study 2 
 
Condition Number 
Removed 
Asks questions answered on the website – qualified interview 6 
Asks questions answered on the website – marginal interview 4 
Asks questions not answered on the website – qualified interview 6 
Asks questions not answered on the website – marginal interview 5 
Did not ask questions with more info on website – qualified interview 6 
Did not ask questions with more info on website – marginal interview 9 
Did not ask questions with less info on website – qualified interview 5 
Did not ask questions with less info on website – marginal interview 12 
 
 
  
---PAGE 143---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
142 
Table 6 
 
Description and Sample Sizes of Study 2 Conditions 
 
Condition ID  Description n 
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
5 
 
 
6 
 
Strong interview performance, asks questions, less information on 
website (i.e., questions are not answered)  
 
Strong interview performance, asks questions, more information 
on website (i.e., questions are answered)  
 
Strong interview performance, does not ask questions 
     Strong interview, does not ask questions, more information 
     Strong interview, does not ask questions, less information 
 
Marginal interview performance, asks questions, less information 
on website (i.e., questions are not answered)   
 
Marginal interview performance, asks questions, more 
information on website (i.e., questions are answered) 
 
Marginal interview performance, does not ask questions 
     Marginal interview, does not ask questions, more information 
     Marginal interview, does not ask questions, less information 
 
 
38 
 
 
36 
 
 
45 
23 
22 
 
23 
 
 
23 
 
 
69 
34 
35 
 
  
---PAGE 144---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
143 
Table 7 
 
Internal Reliabilities for Scales in Study 2 
 
Scale Cronbach’s 
Alpha 
P-O Fit .96 
Extraversion .88 
Conscientiousness .95 
Openness to Experience .93 
Preparation .93 
Motivation .90 
Interest in the Job .94 
Confidence .89 
Hiring Ratings .97 
Expectations about what Applicants Should do to Prepare .84 
Beliefs about what Applicants Did to Prepare .92 
Evaluation of Questions .93 
 
---PAGE 145---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
144 
Table 8 
 
Means, Standard Deviations, and Intercorrelations Among Study Variables for Study 2 
 
Measures M SD         
      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1) PO Fit 5.34 1.47  (.96)               
2) Extraversion 4.35 1.18 .55**  (.88)             
3) Openness to Experience 4.44 0.93 .73** .69**  (.93)           
4) Conscientiousness 5.00 1.44 .84** .58** .74**  (.95)         
5) Preparation 4.83 1.54 .81** .56** .69** .78**  (.93)       
6) Motivation 5.14 1.35 .78** .62** .73** .78** .81**  (.90)     
7) Interest in the Job 4.91 1.62 .63** .59** .69** .64** .71** .79**  (.94)   
8) Applicant Confidence 5.01 1.57 .74** .65** .69** .73** .77** .74** .71**  (.89) 
9) Hiring Rating 5.10 1.55 .77** .49** .59** .74** .69** .71** .53** .56** 
10) Hiring Recommendation Item 2.28 1.29 -.87** -.58** -.72** -.85** -.81** -.79** -.70** -.77** 
11) Expectation for Applicant Questions 2.30 0.46  .09  .04  .08  .07 .15* .13*  .09  .07 
12) Expectation for Preparation 7.01 4.63 - .03 - .04 - .03 - .07 - .06 - .07 - .01  .01 
13) Evaluation of Preparation 14.20 4.04  .05  .07  .05  .07  .13  .11  .06 - .03 
14) Evaluation of Applicant Questions 4.53 1.64 .65** .51** .65** .62** .72** .61** .59** .59** 
15) Frequency Conducting Interviews 1.42 0.81 -.19** - .02 - .09 - .09 - .12 -.15* - .06 - .08 
16) Interviewing Skills 2.03 1.13 -.15* - .02 - .06 - .12 - .12 - .07 - .02 - .03 
17) Number of Interviews Over Career 10.67 46.94 -.20** - .12 -.15* - .1  -.170* -.19** -.16* - .11 
18) Career Length 6.15 5.53 -.18** - .05 -.21** - .12 -.140* -.14* - .12 - .05 
19) Gender 1.73 0.44 - .01  <.01   <.01   <.01   - .01 - .03 - .04 - .03 
20) Age 23.77 6.35 -.15* - .04 -.18** - .12 -.140* - .11 - .09 - .06 
21) Ethnicity 2.83 1.14 - .01 - .06 - .02 - .06 - .01  .02 - .04 - .01 
Note. Internal consistency estimates on diagonal **Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level *Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level. 
  
  
---PAGE 146---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
145 
Table 8 Continued 
 
Means, Standard Deviations, and Intercorrelations Among Study Variables for Study 2 
 
Measures M SD         
      9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
1) PO Fit 5.34 1.47                 
2) Extraversion 4.35 1.18                 
3) Openness to Experience 4.44 0.93                 
4) Conscientiousness 5.00 1.44                 
5) Preparation 4.83 1.54                 
6) Motivation 5.14 1.35                 
7) Interest in the Job 4.91 1.62                 
8) Applicant Confidence 5.01 1.57                 
9) Hiring Rating 5.10 1.55  (.97)               
10) Hiring Recommendation Item 2.28 1.29 -.76** --              
11) Expectation for Applicant Questions 2.30 0.46 .19** - .11 --            
12) Expectation for Preparation 7.01 4.63 -.25**  .03 -.14*  (.84)         
13) Evaluation of Preparation 14.20 4.04 .41** - .06 .21** -.91**  (.92)       
14) Evaluation of Applicant Questions 4.53 1.64 .43** -.63**  .06 .22** -.24**  (.93)     
15) Frequency Conducting Interviews 1.42 0.81 - .09  .12 - .11  .12 - .07 - .05 --    
16) Interviewing Skills 2.03 1.13 -.17** .14* -.14*  .05 - .05  .01 .51** --  
17) Number of Interviews Over Career 10.67 46.94 - .09 .15* - .11  .05 - .02 - .16 .59** .36** 
18) Career Length 6.15 5.53 - .09 .15* - .12  .07 - .06  <.01  .30** .23** 
19) Gender 1.73 0.44  .05  .04  .02 - .05  .12  .02 - .03 - .02 
20) Age 23.77 6.35 - .06 .14* -.16*  .06 - .04 - .01 .28** .25** 
21) Ethnicity 2.83 1.14 - .10  - .01 - .05 .25** -.24**  .10   .05  .06 
Note. Internal consistency estimates on diagonal **Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level *Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level. 
 
  
        
---PAGE 147---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
146 
Table 8 Continued 
 
Means, Standard Deviations, and Intercorrelations Among Study Variables for Study 2 
 
Measures M SD         
      17 18 19 20 21 
1) PO Fit 5.34 1.47           
2) Extraversion 4.35 1.18           
3) Openness to Experience 4.44 0.93           
4) Conscientiousness 5.00 1.44           
5) Preparation 4.83 1.54           
6) Motivation 5.14 1.35           
7) Interest in the Job 4.91 1.62           
8) Applicant Confidence 5.01 1.57           
9) Hiring Rating 5.10 1.55           
10) Hiring Recommendation Item 2.28 1.29           
11) Expectation for Applicant Questions 2.30 0.46           
12) Expectation for Preparation 7.01 4.63           
13) Evaluation of Preparation 14.20 4.04           
14) Evaluation of Applicant Questions 4.53 1.64           
15) Frequency Conducting Interviews 1.42 0.81           
16) Interviewing Skills 2.03 1.13           
17) Number of Interviews Over Career 10.67 46.94 --          
18) Career Length 6.15 5.53 .34** --        
19) Gender 1.73 0.44  .07 - .01 --      
20) Age 23.77 6.35 .32** .89**  .01 --    
21) Ethnicity 2.83 1.14  .02  <.01 - .05  .03   
Note. Internal consistency estimates on diagonal **Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level *Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level. 
  
  
---PAGE 148---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
147 
Table 9 
 
Summary of Multiple Regression Analysis Study 2 
 
Variable B SEB β p 
Intercept 48 .34  .16 
P-O Fit .41 .10 .40 ** 
Preparation .06 .09 .06 .48 
Motivation .34 .11 .30 * 
Interest -.12 .08 -.12 .12 
Extraversion .03 .08 .02 .70 
Conscientiousness .22 .10 .21 .02 
Openness to Experience -.08 .13 -.05 .54 
Note. B = unstandardized regression coefficient; SEB = standard error of the coefficient; β = 
standardized coefficient. ** is p < .001. * is p < .01 
  
---PAGE 149---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
148 
Appendix A 
Company Website Content: About Us and Program Description 
Program Description: Questions Answered 
Introduction to Company Information Pages 
 
On the next page you will review website content from the organization’s “About Us” page, and the 
Management Trainee Program description from the career section of the website where the applicant 
applied. It is very important that you consider the requirements and responsibilities of the role as de tailed 
in the program description to help you determine whether the applicant is right for the position. To ensure 
that you understand the role, please read the program description thoroughly. After carefully reviewing 
the description, you will be asked to reflect on what you have read and answer some open-ended 
questions. Before you can proceed to the rest of the study, you will also have to accurately complete a 
brief quiz about the program description. 
  
You will learn more about the Management Trainee Program on the next page, but first let's highlight 
some of the information from the description. The Management Trainee Program is an annual program, 
and anywhere between 10 and 20 people get accepted each year. The purpose of the program is to train 
associates to become eventual Managers in one of 6 areas important to the company. Trainees will 
proceed through the program as a group, and will work closely together in even smaller groups as they 
gain exposure to each of the six different areas during their rotations. At the end of rotations, trainees will 
collaborate with leaders in the company to choose one of the six areas that aligns with their interests, 
while also taking into account the organization’s talent needs and the trainee’s performance during 
rotations. After work areas are selected, the management trainee program lasts another year. While the 
goal is to train individuals for management positions upon completion of the program, being immediately 
promoted at the end of the program is not guaranteed, but likely within 2 years of finishing. 
 
About Us Page 
 
About Us 
  
Our organization believes in our products and services. We make it a point to provide excellent customer service. 
While our customers and products are vital to our success, we never lose sight of our most valued asset – our 
employees. We are committed to helping our employees reach their career goals. To do so, we provide employees 
with resources, development, and a supportive culture to help them reach their potentials. 
  
There are many benefits to working here: 
  
 Collaboration. Our employees help one another and share resources. You will work with teams that are passionate 
and committed to common goals. 
 Developmental Opportunities. We provide workshops, on-the-job training, online learning, and tuition assistance. 
 Work-Life Balance. We support balance between work and life through flextime, job-sharing, and other personalized 
solutions to help reduce stress. 
 Transparency. We believe in open communication. We are upfront about our goals, strategies, and company 
performance so you can understand how you fit in. We urge our employees to be honest and direct with one another. 
 Diversity and Inclusion. We welcome individuals from all backgrounds to encourage different perspectives and 
creative thinking. 
 Bonuses Based on Company Performance. Our employees receive bonuses when the company exceeds its 
yearly goals. 
---PAGE 150---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
149 
 
Program Description 
 
CURRENT EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES 
  
Management Trainee Program 
  
Opportunities in Finance, Sales, Marketing, Information Systems, Supply Chain, and Human Resources 
  
Our Management Trainee Program is a hands-on experience that prepares individuals for a career in management. 
Every year, 10 to 20 applicants are accepted into the program. These hires proceed through the program as a 
group and attend training courses together. During the rotational part of the program, trainees are spread among 
various departments. They will work on real projects driving business needs. Trainees in the same rotational 
groups work on many of the same projects together, although they will be given unique solo work as well. For 
development, trainees are paired with mentors who have previously completed the program. Mentors serve as 
resources that can help with networking, provide career advice, and advise about the program. 
  
The rotational program takes two years to complete. Below is an overview of the program timeline. 
  
Year 1 (Months 1-6): Rotational Training  
  
During your first six months, you will rotate through six focus areas: 
  
1. Finance 
2. Sales 
3. Marketing 
4. Information Systems 
5. Supply Chain 
6. Human Resources 
  
Rotations will help you learn how the organization operates and how the various areas impact one another. It will also 
help you decide which focus area interests you the most for your full time placement. The rotational period gives us a 
chance to assess your fit, expertise and skills. Your performance will be evaluated during each step of the rotation to 
help us better understand your strengths and areas needing development. 
  
When you apply for the program, you do not need to know which focus area you wish to pursue. You and program 
leadership will collaboratively decide the best focus area for you after rotations are finished. A number of 
factors influence this decision. First, we want you to be excited about growing and developing your career here. Our 
goal is to find an area that you are passionate about, that you feel is a good fit, and that matches your career goals. 
While we do our best to reach a mutually agreeable decision based on your preferences, we also have to 
consider the organization’s needs. Your skills, previous experience, and performance during the rotational 
period will also affect placement decisions. 
  
Year 1 (Months 7-12): Primary Focus Area 
  
After your focus area is agreed upon, you will become more deeply involved in the activities of your new department. 
You will take ownership of projects of increasing size and scope. You may be asked to supervise others informally 
(e.g., small teams and special projects), and will participate in several leadership training courses to prepare you to 
formally manage others within the organization. 
  
Year 2: Supervision and Project Work 
  
During your second year, you will continue to work on projects of increasing size and importance within your area. In 
addition, your formal managerial duties will begin when you are promoted to an assistant manager. Before moving 
into this role, you must complete all required training and meet performance standards. 
---PAGE 151---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
150 
  
Program Completion 
  
At program completion, you will be able to mentor, develop, and manage others. Assistant managers are often 
quickly promoted to managers. Although being promoted to a managerial position is NOT guaranteed to occur 
immediately upon finishing, 90% of our program graduates are promoted to managers within 2 years. Cases 
in which employees are not promoted to managers are often the result of poor performance, shifting career 
paths, or poor fit with the organization. 
  
Basic Qualifications: 
 Must be a graduating college senior or have a completed Bachelor’s degree 
 Must have a cumulative GPA of at least 2.5 
 Must be able to work full time, 40 hours per week 
 Should be eager to learn and open to new experiences 
  
Compensation: 
 This is a salaried, full time position with benefits 
 Relocation assistance provided 
 
Reflection Questions 
 
Please answer the following questions regarding what you have just read about the company and the Management 
Trainee Program.  
 
1. Describe why teamwork and getting along well with others might be import ant as trainees 
progress though the Management Trainee Program. 
 
2. Describe how both the trainee and the organizational leadership are involved in choosing the final 
area for the trainee to work after rotations. 
 
3. What are some of the reasons that an individual may not be immediately promoted to Manager 
following completion of the Management Trainee Program? 
 
4. What is one of the benefits to working at the organization that you find most appealing? 
 
Program Description: Questions NOT Answered 
Introduction to Company Information Pages 
 
On the next page you will review website content from the organization’s “About Us” page, and the 
Management Trainee Program description from the career section of the website where the applicant 
applied. It is very important that you consider the requirements and responsibilities of the role as detailed 
in the program description to help you determine whether the applicant is right for the position. To ensure 
that you understand the role, please read the program description thoroughly. After carefully reviewing 
the description, you will be asked to reflect on what you have read and answer some open -ended 
questions. Before you can proceed to the rest of the study, you will also have to accurately complete a 
brief quiz about the program description. 
  
You will learn more about the Management Trainee Program on the next page, but first let’s highlight 
some of the information from the description. The Management Trainee Program accepts a number of 
interested applicants every year. The purpose of the program is to train associates to become eventual 
---PAGE 152---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
151 
Managers in one of 6 areas important to the company. These areas are Finance, Sales, Marketing, 
Information Systems, Supply Chain, and Human Resources. Trainees gain exposure to each of the six 
different areas during rotations in the first year, but work exclusively in one area for the second and final 
year of the program. After their second year, trainees graduate from the program and continue their work 
in the organization. 
 
About Us Page 
  
About Us 
  
Our organization believes in our products and services. We make it a point to provide excellent customer service. 
While our customers and products are vital to our success, we never lose sight of our most valued asset – our 
employees. We are committed to helping our employees reach their career goals. To do so, we provide employees 
with resources, development, and a supportive culture to help them reach their potentials. 
  
There are many benefits to working here: 
  
 Collaboration. Our employees help one another and share resources. You will work with teams that are 
passionate and committed to common goals. 
 Developmental Opportunities. We provide workshops, on-the-job training, online learning, and tuition 
assistance. 
 Work-Life Balance. We support balance between work and life through flextime, job-sharing, and other 
personalized solutions to help reduce stress. 
 Transparency. We believe in open communication. We are upfront about our goals, strategies, and company 
performance so you can understand how you fit in. We urge our employees to be honest and direct with one 
another. 
 Diversity and Inclusion. We welcome individuals from all backgrounds to encourage different perspectives and 
creative thinking. 
 Bonuses Based on Company Performance. Our employees receive bonuses when the company exceeds its 
yearly goals 
 
 
Program Description 
 
CURRENT EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES 
  
Management Trainee Program 
  
Opportunities in Finance, Sales, Marketing, Information Systems, Supply Chain, and Human Resources 
  
Our Management Trainee Program is a hands-on experience that prepares individuals for a career in management. 
Every year, a number of applicants are accepted into the program. These trainees are required to attend 
training courses throughout the duration of the program. They must also gain experience in various 
departments within the organization. Trainees work on real projects driving business needs. For development, 
trainees are paired with mentors who have previously completed the program. Mentors serve as resources that can 
help with networking, provide career advice, and advise about the program. 
  
The rotational program takes two years to complete. Below is an overview of the program timeline. 
  
Year 1 (Months 1-6): Rotational Training  
  
During your first six months, you will rotate through six focus areas: 
  
---PAGE 153---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
152 
1. Finance 
2. Sales 
3. Marketing 
4. Information Systems 
5. Supply Chain 
6. Human Resources 
  
Rotations will help you learn how the organization operates and how the various areas impact one another. It will also 
help you decide which focus area interests you the most for your full time placement. The rotational period gives us a 
chance to assess your fit, expertise, and skills. Your performance will be evaluated during each step of the rotation to 
help us better understand your strengths and areas needing development. 
  
When you apply for the program, you do not need to know which focus area you wish to pursue. This will be 
decided after your rotational period is complete. A number of factors will affect placement decisions. 
  
Year 1 (Months 7-12): Primary Focus Area 
  
Once you have a focus area, you will become more deeply involved in the activities of your new department. You will 
take ownership of projects of increasing size and scope. You may be asked to supervise others informally (e.g., small 
teams and special projects), and will participate in several leadership training courses to prepare you to formally 
manage others within the organization. 
  
Year 2: Supervision and Project Work 
  
During your second year, you will continue to work on projects of increasing size and importance within your area. In 
addition, your formal managerial duties will begin when you are promoted to assistant manager. Before moving into 
this role, you must complete all required training and meet performance standards. 
  
Basic Qualifications: 
 Must be a graduating college senior or have a completed Bachelor’s degree 
 Must have a cumulative GPA of at least 2.5 
 Must be able to work full time, 40 hours per week 
 Should be eager to learn and open to new experiences 
  
Compensation: 
 This is a salaried, full time position with benefits 
 Relocation assistance provided 
 
Reflection Questions 
 
Please answer the following questions regarding what you have just read about the company and the Management 
Trainee Program.  
 
1. What do you think would help someone to be successful in the Management Trainee Program?  
 
2. Describe what rotations are and what happens after rotations end. 
 
3. According to the program description, what happens upon completion of the program after the second year? 
 
4. What is one of the benefits to working at the organization that you find most appealing? 
 
  
---PAGE 154---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
153 
Appendix B 
Quiz Used to Reinforce Manipulations 
Quiz following Program Description 
 
1. Which of the following was NOT listed as a benefit to working at the organization? 
a. Collaboration 
b. An Onsite Fitness Center 
 
2. What is the length of the Management Trainee Program? 
a. 2 Years 
b. However long it takes individuals to complete their requirements 
 
3. How do applicants progress through the program? 
a. In groups 
b. This was not shared in the program description 
 
4. How many people are hired each year into the Management Trainee Program?  
a. 10-20 
b. This was not shared in the program description 
 
5. Applicants must choose a focus area (i.e., Finance, Sales, Marketing, Information Systems, 
Supply Chain, or HR) in which they wish to work before the program begins.  
a. True 
b. False 
 
6. How are focus areas chosen? 
a. Collaboratively based on employee preferences, skills, and performance, as well as 
organizational needs. 
b. This was not shared in the program description 
 
7. Are all employees promoted to managerial positions upon completing the program?  
a. No, but 90% are promoted to Manager within 2 years of finishing 
b. This was not shared in the program description 
 
8. The Management Trainee Program is unpaid. 
a. True 
b. False 
 
9. Applicants must have a Bachelor’s degree or be a graduating college senior to apply for this 
program. 
a. True 
b. False 
 
10. Both full and part time opportunities are available. 
a. True 
---PAGE 155---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
154 
b. False 
 
11. What is the GPA requirement for acceptance into the program? 
a. 2.5 
b. There is no GPA requirement 
Quiz recap when questions are not answered on the website: 
 
To Recap: 
  
  A collaborative culture is a benefit to working at the organization. 
 
 The Management Trainee Program lasts 2 years. 
 
 Applicants proceed through the program in groups. 
 
 10-20 people are hired into the program each year. 
 
 Applicants do NOT need to choose a focus area prior to beginning. Both leadership and 
associates will collaboratively choose this area based on employee preferences, skills, 
performance, and organizational needs. 
 
 90% of program grads are promoted to manager within 2 years of finishing. 
 
 The management trainee program is a paid position. 
 
 Applicants must have already graduated with their bachelors OR be about to graduate. 
 
 
 Only full time opportunities are available. 
 
 Applicants must have a 2.5 cumulative GPA to be accepted. 
 
Quiz recap when questions are not answered on the website: 
 
To Recap: 
  
 A collaborative culture is a benefit to working at the organization. 
  
 The Management Trainee Program lasts 2 years. 
  
 The program description did not mention whether associates progress through the program in 
groups. 
  
 The program description did not mention the exact number of people that are hired each year.  
  
 Applicants do NOT need to choose a focus area prior to beginning. 
  
 The program description did not mention how focus areas are chosen. 
  
---PAGE 156---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
155 
 The program description did not mention whether all employees are promoted to managerial 
positions at the end of the program. 
  
 The management trainee program is a paid position. 
  
 Applicants must have already graduated with their bachelors OR be about to graduate. 
  
 Only full time opportunities are available. 
  
 Applicants must have a 2.5 cumulative GPA to be accepted. 
 
  
---PAGE 157---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
156 
Appendix C 
Résumés of the Applicant 
Résumé for Qualified Applicant 
 
Michael Fairmont 
  
CAREER OBJECTIVE 
To obtain a full-time career in management; capitalizing on my business degree and further developing the business 
acumen I will need to find smart solutions to business and personnel issues. Will bring an attention to detail, a “can-
do” attitude, and the ability to learn quickly to a management trainee position. 
  
EDUCATION 
University of Kansas | Lawrence, Kansas | 2010-2014 
 Bachelor of Science Degree in Business Administration 
 Minor: Accounting 
 Cumulative GPA: 3.9 
  
WORK EXPERIENCE 
Audit & Finance Intern | Dairy Farmers of America | Kansas City, Kansas | May 2014 – September 2014 
 Prepared presentations for the finance and accounting departments. 
 Conducted financial and operational audits, and filled out audit work papers documenting steps in the audit 
process. 
 Performed transaction and compliance testing to evaluate the existence, efficiency and effectiveness of internal 
control procedures. 
 Created a technical report and delivered an oral presentation to management at the conclusion of the audit, 
discussing deficiencies, recommending corrective action, and suggesting improvements to internal controls. 
  
Guest Service Team Leader | Target | Lawrence, KS | September 2010 – April 2014 
 Troubleshot and resolved guests’ issues and concerns so they left the store satisfied with their experience at 
Guest Services. 
 Handled difficult interactions with angry guests, maintaining a level head and a high degree of professionalism. 
 Managed team schedules to ensure the necessary number of team members were covering each shift to be able 
to meet guests needs quickly 
 Used a cash register to accurately scan and bag items, as well as calculate and collect payment. 
 Started as a Guest Service Team Member and was promoted to Guest Service Team Leader in January 2014. 
  
Organizational Development Internship | Garmin | Olathe, KS | June 2013 – August 2013 
 Worked with managers to chart out training programs. 
 Created training policies and evaluated training effectiveness after program completion. 
 Conducted training sessions relating to leveraging innovation at work. 
 Worked on the development of a new online safety training course to be implemented in 2015. 
  
SKILLS AND ABILITIES 
Computer – MS Office Suite, MS Access, MS Outlook, QuickBooks, Oracle 
  
ORGANIZATIONS 
 Alpha Kappa Psi Business Fraternity 
 Delta Sigma Pi Business Fraternity 
 Finance Club 
---PAGE 158---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
157 
  
PUBLICATIONS 
 Self-Insight and Training Effectiveness: Barriers and Facilitators of Learning Under Time Pressure. Presented at 
the 56th Midwest Academy of Management Conference; Milwaukee, Wisconsin; October 2013 
  
Résumé for Marginally Qualified Applicant 
 
Michael Fairmont 
  
CAREER OBJECTIVE 
To obtain a full-time career in management; capitalizing on my business degree and further developing my skills 
relating to business-relevant issues. 
  
EDUCATION 
University of Kansas | Lawrence, Kansas | 2010-2014 
 Bachelor of Science Degree in Business Administration 
 Cumulative GPA: 2.7 
  
WORK EXPERIENCE 
Audit & Finance Intern | Dairy Farmers of America | Kansas City, Kansas | May 2014 – September 2014 
 Drafted presentations for the finance and accounting departments 
 Assisted with audits by filling out audit work papers documenting steps in the audit process. 
 Helped perform transaction and compliance testing to evaluate the existence, efficiency and effectiveness of 
internal control procedures. 
 Worked together with other interns to create a technical report and deliver a presentation with recommendations 
to management at the conclusion of the audit. 
  
Guest Service Team Member | Target | Lawrence, KS | September 2010 – April 2014 
 Troubleshot and resolved guests’ issues and concerns so they left the store satisfied with their experience at 
Guest Services. Referred more serious complaints to Team Leader. 
 Handled difficult interactions with angry guests, maintaining a level head and a high degree of professionalism. 
 Used a cash register to accurately scan and bag items, as well as calculate and collect payment. 
  
Waiter | Mario’s Pizzeria | Olathe, KS | March 2009 – August 2010 
 Presented menus to patrons and answered questions about menu items, making recommendations upon 
request. 
 Served food and beverages to patrons. 
 Checked that customers were enjoying their meals and resolved any issues they had with their orders. 
 Prepared checks that itemized and total meal costs and sales taxes. 
 
SKILLS AND ABILITIES 
Computer – MS Office Suite, MS Access and MS Outlook 
 
ORGANIZATIONS 
Delta Sigma Pi Business Fraternity 
 
  
---PAGE 159---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
158 
Appendix D 
Interview Scripts for the Videotaped Employment Interview 
Qualified Interview Script 
 
Interviewer: Hi. My name’s Brian, and I’ll be interviewing you today. You must be Michael.  
  
Applicant: I am. It’s nice to meet you.  
  
Interviewer: Likewise - I’m glad you could meet with me. I’ve already looked over your résumé, so let’s 
go ahead and jump right in. We use what are called behavioral interviews here. It will consist of four 
questions. When you answer, first I’d like you to describe the situation and set the scene. Then you should 
tell me about your specific actions to address the situation, and the resulting outcome. Your examples can 
come from work or relevant school experiences, given this is an entry-level position. Does that make 
sense?  
  
Applicant: Yes it does.  
  
Interviewer: Just to let you know, I will be taking notes during the interview to help me remember your 
examples later. Do you need anything before we get started? Can I get you some water?  
  
Applicant: No, I’m fine. Thanks.  
  
Interviewer: Ok then. First, I’d like you to tell me about a time you voluntarily took the lead on a project 
or initiative. This could be either a formal or informal leadership role.  
  
Applicant: Sure…  
  
 
I think a good example would be during my Finance internship. The organization introduced innovation 
training, which everyone was required to take. However, there was some push back from the people in my 
department because they felt the training didn’t seem to apply to us. Plus, the training focused on why 
innovation was important, but didn’t really show how to be innovative, particularly in Finance. I brought 
up the issue with my manager, and we talked about how specific training tied to the work we do in 
Finance might help. I’d taken a class on training and development in college, and proposed an e-
learning course focusing on specific strategies we could use in Finance. I volunteered to take the lead on 
developing the training, and my Manager assigned two others to work on it with me. 
  
We got started right away by first discussing what the overall goal of the training course was. I wanted to 
make sure we were all on the same page and see if my teammates had any other particular ideas that I 
may not have thought of. Once we were agreed on the overall vision, 
we brainstormed potential problems that could arise so that we could address them proactively. Since I 
was already halfway through my summer internship, I didn’t have a lot of time but we had a lot of work 
to do. I delegated work according to our individual strengths and interests to speed 
up our progress. Whenever any of us got stuck, we worked together to figure out a solution. In the end, 
we came up with some really amazing content. We even had time to enlist the help of one of the 
company’s graphic designers to create some visual elements.  
---PAGE 160---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
159 
  
Interviewer: Great! So what was the ultimate outcome of the project? Did you finish the training?  
  
Applicant: Yes, the training was set to go “live” in our department shortly after I left. 
  
Interviewer: So would you say the project was a success then?  
  
Applicant: I’d say so. We accomplished our goals, and the process helped me realize my strengths as a 
leader as well as what I need to work on. Since this was my first experience leading a team in 
a professional setting, I asked for feedback throughout the process, which helped me focus on the things I 
needed to improve.  
  
Interviewer: Good – that sounds like it was a great learning experience for you. Next, I’d like you to 
describe a time when you dealt with a problem—at work, or in a class, for instance—and describe for me 
how you designed or worked toward a solution.  
  
Applicant: Ok…. Um, my freshman year of college I joined Delta Sigma Pi, a national business 
fraternity, and during my junior year I served on the executive board of the fraternity. The exec board had 
been aware that the number of new pledges has been dropping year after year for quite some time. I put 
together an initiative to look into the issue and increase membership numbers. We started by surveying 
current business students, both those who were members of our fraternity and those who 
weren’t. We quickly realized that people were choosing to join other business organizations on campus 
because if the intensity of our pledging process. With that information in hand, we began brainstorming 
ideas on how we could change others’ perceptions of DSP. From one of my business classes, I learned 
one way to make brainstorming more effective is to have people write down ideas individually before 
getting together as a group, so we asked everyone to bring at least three ideas to get as many ideas on the 
table as possible.  
  
The group agreed on three ideas. First, we were completely up-front about the pledging 
process to eliminate any misinformation floating around campus. Second, we increased advertising by 
hosting more campus events, holding more informational sessions, passing out fliers at the beginning of 
each semester, and asking our members to talk-up the organization more to non-members. Finally, we 
began really selling the advantages of membership, such as networking opportunities with DSP 
alumni. The next recruitment season, we actually saw an increased number of pledges over the previous 
year. To make sure this increase in pledges wasn’t just a coincidence, we conducted focus groups with 
new members.  
  
Interviewer: So walk me through what you discussed in those focus groups.  
  
Applicant: We mainly focused on as why they chose to join DSP and any hesitations they may have had. 
However, we also asked for any feedback they had on the pledging process, because even though I think 
the solutions we came up with that first semester were a good start, there is always room to improve.  
  
Interviewer: Great! Being open to change and potential improvement are definitely important to 
success. Just give me a minute here while I finish writing... 
  
Ok, next question. Tell me about a time you had to adjust your work priorities to meet changing demands.  
  
---PAGE 161---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
160 
Applicant: One of my main projects as an Audit Intern was to create a technical report and presentation 
with recommendations for improvement following our audit. I like to organize when working on long 
term project like this one, so I created to-do lists for myself everyday to help me stay focused and make 
good progress. One day near the end of my internship, I had scheduled time to read through my notes and 
start outlining what the technical report would cover on our most recent audit. However, that 
morning my manager was told that a presentation she was scheduled to give the 
following week was pushed up, meaning we had one and a half days to get the presentation put together 
rather than an entire week. My manager had her hands full with another project, so when she asked if 
someone from our team could help her, I volunteered to put the presentation together for her. I still had a 
few weeks to work on the technical report and presentation, so I put that aside. Ultimately, I wanted to 
take on the task because I knew it would give me a chance to work on something that otherwise I 
wouldn’t have had a chance to do. Plus, I was happy to help my manager out, and it gave me a chance to 
show her what I was capable of.  
  
Interviewer: So were you able to get the presentation done?  
  
Applicant: Yes, I got the entire thing done for her that day. Then she had the next morning to make some 
tweaks to it before she had to present it. She said the presentation went really well so I was happy.  
  
Interviewer: I’m sure your boss appreciated the extra help you gave her. A little help can go a long way 
when you have unexpected issues that come up like that.  
  
Next, can you tell me about a time when you gained commitment to an idea you had?  
  
Applicant: Hmm. One thing that comes to mind was during my time in Guest Services. I liked the 
work, but it could be a lot more difficult to handle after the holiday season. The department is crowded 
with people returning gifts, and people are exhausted and irritated from waiting in long lines. I was 
dreading the upcoming after holiday shifts, and I approached my manager with some ideas I had about 
handling this year’s rush. First, I thought we could set up tables with snacks and beverages for 
Guests. Also, I thought it would be helpful to set up specific lines in Guest Services to cater to different 
needs, such as returns, exchanges, pick-ups, and customer questions.  
  
My manager was skeptical at first, but I made my case. For one thing, the stress of the season can be so 
high that a lot of our workers end up quitting just after the Holidays. Plus, we always got the highest 
number of negative comment cards from Guests right after the holidays, showing we were falling short of 
our goal to give Guests the best experience possible. Supplying food and drinks was a relatively low cost 
way to help Guests relax, and in turn, have more pleasant interactions with employees. Multiple lines 
could allow individuals with brief questions to quickly be on their way without having to wait behind 
people returning items. My manager said he would consider it. Before my next shift, I looked online to 
see if any stores had tried similar strategies after the holidays, and I found a couple of examples of stores 
trying similar things with positive results. To minimize the risk of trying something new, I 
suggested trying the method for a couple of hours, and if it wasn’t working, then we could 
easily revert back to normal where each team member handles all types of requests.  
  
Interviewer: So did your idea work?  
  
Applicant: My manager agreed to try it, and we ended up using the specialized lines all day, although 
after a couple of hours it became clear that we needed to devote more people to returns and even fewer to 
answering questions and handling customer pick-ups. After making those changes and adjusting as the 
---PAGE 162---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
161 
day went on, the lines worked really well to help people get in and out quicker. My team members and 
Guests generally seemed to be happier, and we were delivering better service because we were 
not interacting with as many irritated customers. Plus, we cut the number of negative comment cards in 
half from the previous year.  
  
Interviewer: Excellent. Well, those are all the questions I have for you today. It’s been a pleasure talking 
to you. We will be conducting more interviews over the next two weeks, after which you can expect to 
hear from us regarding whether we will be offering you a position in the Management Trainee Program. 
  
Is there anything you’d like to go over before we bring this to an end?  
  
______________________________________________________________________________  
  
Version without questions: 
 
Applicant: No, I don’t think so. Thank you for meeting with me! I look forward to hearing from you!  
  
Interviewer: It was wonderful meeting you. Let me see you out.  
 
Version with questions: 
 
 Applicant: I actually have a few questions about the program if we have enough time to go over them.  
  
Interviewer: Sure.  
  
Applicant: After the rotational period is over, do we get to choose the area in which we would prefer to 
work?  
  
Interviewer: You’ll have a chance to voice your preference, but the final decision will be more of a 
collaboration between you and leadership. We definitely want you to be able to work in the area you are 
passionate about, but at the same time we also have to consider your skills, background, performance 
during your rotations, and the needs of the organization.  
  
Applicant: Ok, that makes sense. Are employees ever not promoted to manager at the end of the 
program, and if so, why?  
  
Interviewer: Being immediately promoted to Manager at the end of the program is not guaranteed. 
However, 90% of program graduates are promoted within 2 years of completion. The most common 
reasons people don’t become managers are poor performance, not fitting with the organization, and 
sometimes graduates decide management is not for them and decide to change their career path.  
  
Applicant: How many people are accepted into the program, and will I work closely alongside other 
trainees?  
  
Interviewer: We do this program every year, and usually end up accepting about 10-20 people at a time. 
You will definitely work closely with other trainees, because everyone proceeds as a group and will 
complete training courses together. You will also be split into smaller groups for rotations where you will 
work on projects with your program members. 
  
---PAGE 163---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
162 
Applicant: Ok, that was my last question. Thanks for answering those for me, and thank you again for 
meeting with me! I look forward to hearing from you!  
  
Interviewer: It was great meeting you. Let me see you out. 
 
Marginally Qualified Interview 
 
Interviewer: Hi. My name’s Brian, and I’ll be interviewing you today. You must be Michael.  
  
Applicant: I am. It’s nice to meet you.  
  
Interviewer: Likewise - I’m glad you could meet with me. I’ve already looked over your résumé, so let’s 
go ahead and jump right in. We use what are called behavioral interviews here. It will consist of four 
questions. When you answer, first I’d like you to describe the situation and set the scene. Then you 
should tell me about your specific actions to address the situation, and the resulting outcome. Your 
examples can come from work or relevant school experiences, given this is an entry-level position. Does 
that make sense?  
  
Applicant: Yes it does.  
  
Interviewer: Just to let you know, I will be taking notes during the interview to help me remember your 
examples later. Do you need anything before we get started? Can I get you some water?  
  
Applicant: No, I’m fine. Thanks.  
  
Interviewer: Ok then. First, I’d like you to tell me about a time you voluntarily took the lead on a project 
or initiative. This might be either a formal or informal leadership role.  
  
Applicant: Hmmm… Ok. ……  
  
Sorry I’m just trying to think of what the best example would be….  
  
  
Ummmm. I think maybe a good example would be during my Finance internship. The organization 
introduced innovation training, which everyone was required to take. However, people in my 
department were complaining because they didn’t think the training really applied to us. My 
manager thought training, such as an e-learning course specifically for Finance might help. She asked for 
a volunteer to create the training, and my coworker convinced me this would look good on my résumé 
so I decided to work on it with him, and two others were assigned to our team. Plus, I needed a break 
from what I was working on at the time, even if I wasn’t completely sold on the new project.  
  
Thinking of strategies to increase innovation was more difficult than I thought it would 
be since everything I knew about training was from my classes and not actual work experience. Plus, I 
didn’t have a lot of time to research innovation due to the tight deadline. My teammates all had different 
ideas about what the training should look like and couldn’t agree on anything. I wasn’t sold on any of the 
ideas brought forward, but with the deadline being so short I just made the call and we moved forward 
with my co-leader’s idea. When we showed our manager the first draft, it wasn’t exactly what she had in 
mind. However, I did what I could with the resources, time constraints, and ideas that were given to me.  
---PAGE 164---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
163 
  
Interviewer: Did you ever approach your manager for more guidance since this was an area you weren’t 
as familiar with?  
  
Applicant: No. I definitely had quite a few questions, but I decided not to bother my manager with them 
because I didn’t want her to think I couldn’t handle it.  
  
Interviewer: So what was the ultimate outcome of the project? Did you finish the training?  
  
Applicant: Almost. We finished the content, but didn’t get to the final step, putting the content together 
with graphics, videos, and other elements before my internship ended.  
  
Interviewer: So would you say the project was a success then?  
  
Applicant: I’d say so. It was at least headed in the right direction, and we laid the groundwork for the 
training by getting all the content done. The content may have been stronger if my teammates agreed on 
the overall vision of the training.  
  
Interviewer: Well hopefully you learned something from that experience for the next time you are in a 
similar situation. Next, I’d like you to describe a time when you dealt with a problem—at work, or in a 
class, for instance—and suggested or designed a solution.  
  
Applicant: Ok…  
  
……  
  
  
Umm, is it ok if I talk about a problem we had in the business fraternity I was in?  
  
Interviewer: That’s fine.  
  
Applicant: Ok. Uhhh… So. My freshman year of college I joined Delta Sigma Pi, a national business 
fraternity. Our organization was aware that our pledge numbers had been dropping year after year for 
quite some time. So, some other members and I joined a task force to look into the issue and increase 
membership numbers. First, we discussed potential causes. I had personally heard more than once 
that people decided not to join because of the intensity of our pledging process. That seemed to be in line 
with what other members of the task force heard as well. With that information in hand, we began 
brainstorming ideas of how we could change others’ perceptions of DSP. The most practical idea to come 
out of our brainstorming session was to get serious about advertising around campus. We also tried 
to really sell the advantages of membership that others might not know about. The next recruitment 
season, we saw a small increase in the number of interested individuals and new pledges, so our 
strategy appeared to have worked.  
  
Interviewer: So how do you know that it was your strategy that increased pledging? Couldn’t it have just 
been a coincidence?  
  
Applicant: Hmm… I didn’t think of that. I guess it could have been a coincidence, but that doesn’t seem 
likely since our pledging numbers had been getting smaller year after year before we made the change. I 
---PAGE 165---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
164 
guess we should have asked new pledges the reason for joining to see if any of them mentioned the 
advantages of membership we started spreading around. Then we would have known for sure.  
  
Interviewer: Yea – that would have probably been a good first step. But I bet it felt pretty good to 
increase membership either way. 
  
Applicant: Definitely!  
  
Interviewer: Alright, now why don’t you tell me about a time you had to adjust your work priorities to 
meet changing demands.  
  
Applicant: One of my main projects as an Audit Intern was to create a technical report and presentation 
with ideas of how to improve following our audit. One day near the end of my internship, I had scheduled 
time to work on the technical report. I had been putting it off for a while because it seemed like such 
a huge task and I didn’t know where to start. However, that morning my manager was told that a 
presentation she was scheduled to give the following week was pushed up, meaning we had one and a 
half days to get the presentation together rather than a week. My manager had her hands full with another 
project, so she asked if I could help put the presentation together for her. I figured this would be a nice 
distraction from the technical report, so I agreed to work on the presentation instead.  
  
Interviewer: So were you able to get the presentation done?  
  
Applicant: I did some research and put together a presentation outline for her. All that was left for her to 
do was to fill in the details since she was more familiar with the information that needed to be shared than 
I was.  
  
Interviewer: I’m sure your boss appreciated the extra help you gave her. A little help can go a long way 
when you have unexpected issues come up like that.  
  
Next, can you tell me about a time when you gained commitment to an idea you had?  
  
Applicant: Hmm.  
  
Let me just think about this a minute.  
  
Ok, one thing that comes to mind was during my time in Guest Services. I liked the work, but it could be 
a lot more difficult to handle after the holiday season. The department is crowded with people returning 
gifts, and people are exhausted and irritated from waiting in long lines. A month before Christmas, 
my manager challenged the team to come up with some ideas for handling this year’s 
rush. I suggested setting up tables with snacks and beverages for Guests. It wouldn’t cost a whole lot and 
I know when I am tired and hungry I get cranky – which just makes a bad situation worse. My 
manager was skeptical at first. However, considering the high number of negative comment cards we get 
after the holidays, I managed to convince him that it couldn’t hurt to try.  
  
Interviewer: So did your idea work?  
  
Applicant: We ended up putting the food right in front of Guest Services. I don’t think the placement 
was the best because the food table area got really crowded, making it difficult to get to Guest 
---PAGE 166---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
165 
Services. But we learned that if we were going to try the same thing again in the future we needed to think 
more about the placement. I think people still appreciated the cookies even if it did congest the area in 
front of Guest Services a bit.  
  
Interviewer: Excellent. Well, those are all the questions I have for you today. It’s been a pleasure talking 
to you. We will be conducting more interviews over the next two weeks, after which you can expect to 
hear from us regarding whether we will be offering you a position in the Management Trainee Program.  
  
Is there anything you’d like to go over before we bring this to an end?  
  
______________________________________________________________________________  
  
Version without questions: 
 
Applicant: No, I don’t think so. Thank you for meeting with me! I look forward to hearing from you!  
  
Interviewer: It was wonderful meeting you. Let me see you out.  
 
Version with questions: 
 
 Applicant: I actually have a few questions about the program if we have enough time to go over them.  
  
Interviewer: Sure.  
  
Applicant: After the rotational period is over, do we get to choose the area in which we would prefer to 
work?  
  
Interviewer: You’ll have a chance to voice your preference, but the final decision will be more of a 
collaboration between you and leadership. We definitely want you to be able to work in the area you are 
passionate about, but at the same time we also have to consider your skills, background, performance 
during your rotations, and the needs of the organization.  
  
Applicant: Ok, that makes sense. Are employees ever not promoted to manager at the end of the 
program, and if so, why?  
  
Interviewer: Being immediately promoted to Manager at the end of the program is not guaranteed. 
However, 90% of program graduates are promoted within 2 years of completion. The most common 
reasons people don’t become managers are poor performance, not fitting with the organization, and 
sometimes graduates decide management is not for them and decide to change their career path.  
  
Applicant: How many people are accepted into the program, and will I work closely alongside other 
trainees?  
  
Interviewer: We do this program every year, and usually end up accepting about 10-20 people at a time. 
You will definitely work closely with other trainees, because everyone proceeds as a group and will 
complete training courses together. You will also be split into smaller groups for rotations where you will 
work on projects with your program members. 
  
---PAGE 167---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
166 
Applicant: Ok, that was my last question. Thanks for answering those for me, and thank you again for 
meeting with me! I look forward to hearing from you!  
  
Interviewer: It was great meeting you. Let me see you out. 
  
  
  
  
---PAGE 168---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
167 
Appendix E 
Study Scales 
Rating Scale  
Unless otherwise indicated, the following Likert response scale will be used for all scales: 
 
1 
Disagree 
Strongly 
2 
Disagree 
3 
Neither Agree 
Nor Disagree 
4 
Agree 
5 
Agree Strongly 
 
 
The Attributions the Interviewer Makes About the Applicant 
 
Person-Organization Fit  
1. The applicant’s values seem to be similar to what is valued at this organization. 
2. Based on what the applicant appears to believe is important, I believe he or she would 
thrive at this organization 
3. The applicant seems to be a good match for this organization. 
4. I believe the applicant would fit in well at this organization. 
5. This applicant seems to be compatible with the organization. 
6. If hired, the applicant will likely struggle to feel like they belong at this organization. 
7. The applicant’s qualities are just what this organization needs. 
 
Conscientiousness, Extraversion, and Openness (John, Donahue, & Kentle, 1991) 
The applicant seems to be someone who: 
1. Is talkative 
2. Tends to find fault with others 
3. Does a thorough job 
4. Is depressed, blue 
5. Is original, comes up with new ideas 
6. Is reserved 
7. Is helpful and unselfish with others 
8. Can be somewhat careless 
---PAGE 169---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
168 
9. Is relaxed, handles stress well.  
10. Is curious about many different things 
11. Is full of energy 
12. Starts quarrels with others 
13. Is a reliable worker 
14. Can be tense 
15. Is ingenious, a deep thinker 
16. Generates a lot of enthusiasm 
17. Has a forgiving nature 
18. Tends to be disorganized 
19. Worries a lot 
20. Has an active imagination 
21. Tends to be quiet 
22. Is generally trusting 
23. Tends to be lazy 
24. Is emotionally stable, not easily upset 
25. Is inventive 
26. Has an assertive personality 
27. Can be cold and aloof 
28. Perseveres until the task is finished 
29. Can be moody 
30. Values artistic, aesthetic experiences 
31. Is sometimes shy, inhibited 
32. Is considerate and kind to almost everyone 
33. Does things efficiently 
34. Remains calm in tense situations 
35. Prefers work that is routine 
36. Is outgoing, sociable 
37. Is sometimes rude to others 
38. Makes plans and follows through with them 
---PAGE 170---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
169 
39. Gets nervous easily 
40. Likes to reflect, play with ideas 
41. Has few artistic interests 
42. Likes to cooperate with others 
43. Is easily distracted 
44. Is sophisticated in art, music, or literature. 
 
Preparation  
1. The applicant seems to have prepared for the interview. 
2. It is evident that the applicant had researched the organization prior to the interview. 
3. There weren’t any parts of the interview that appeared to catch the applicant off guard. 
4. The applicant should have spent more time getting ready for the interview. (RC) 
5. The applicant’s lack of preparation for the interview was apparent. (RC) 
6. This applicant was prepared. 
 
Motivation 
1. The applicant appears to be an ambitious individual. 
2. The applicant seemed motivated to impress the interviewer. 
3. The applicant showed a desire to perform well during the interview. 
4. The applicant did not seem to know what he/she wanted out of his/her next role. 
5. Receiving a job offer seemed to be this applicant’s top priority. 
6. The applicant seemed determined to receive a job offer. 
 
Interest in the job 
1. The applicant seemed eager to learn about the job. 
2. The applicant appeared to be genuinely interested in what the interviewer had to say. 
3. This applicant seemed interested in the position. 
4. The applicant seemed curious about the job. 
 
 
---PAGE 171---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
170 
Hiring Rating Measurements 
 
Hiring Ratings (Adapted from Cunningham and Macan, 2007) 
Based on all of the information you have received (i.e., the job description, résumé, interview 
performance), please complete the following ratings about the candidate. 
1. I believe the candidate has the skills necessary to be successful in this job. 
2. Based on all of the information that I have about this applicant, I would hire him/her. 
3. Overall, I would recommend that this applicant NOT be hired for the position. 
4. Hiring the applicant is a good decision. 
5. I would evaluate this applicant’s qualifications for this position favorably. 
 
Hiring Recommendation Item: 
1. Would you recommend this person be hired? 
a. Yes, I would definitely hire this person. This person is an extremely good 
candidate. 
b. Yes, I would hire this person with a few reservations. 
c. I’m not sure if I would hire this person. 
d. I don’t think I would hire this person, although I might consider taking a look at 
some additional information about them. 
e. No, I would definitely not hire this person. This person is not a good candidate. 
 
Hiring Decision Item: 
1. Based on everything you know about this job and the candidate, as the hiring manager, 
would you hire this candidate for the position? 
a. YES, I would hire this applicant for the position. 
b. NO, I would not hire this applicant for the position. 
 
Hiring Open Ended Items: 
1. What factors contributed to your decision to hire or not hire this applicant? 
2. What, if anything, would prevent you from hiring this individual? 
---PAGE 172---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
171 
 
Other Measurements for Variables of Interest 
Expectation for Questions (used to categorize participants) 
1. Do you expect applicant to ask the interviewer questions during the job interview? 
a. Yes, applicants who are serious about working for the organization should ask 
questions during the interview. 
b. I am open to hearing any questions the applicant might have, but I do not go into 
an interview expecting the applicant to ask or not ask questions. 
c. No, I do not believe that it is the applicant’s place to ask questions during the job 
interview.  
 
Expectations for Interview Preparations 
Indicate the extent to which you expect an applicant, in preparing for a job interview, to 
do the following prior to the interview: 
  1 – Never 
  2 – Rarely 
  3 – Occasionally/Sometimes 
  4 – Frequently 
  5 – Always   
1. Research the company  
2. Research the job   
3. Brainstorm questions the interviewer is likely to ask 
4. Reflect on past work experiences that might be relevant to the new job 
5. Practice answering interview questions  
6. Think about the questions the applicant might wish to ask the interviewer 
7. Write down questions to ask the interviewer to take along to the interview 
 
Evaluation of the Applicant Interview Preparations 
Indicate the extent to which you believe that applicant you watched, in preparing for this 
job interview, did the following: 
---PAGE 173---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
172 
  1 – Never 
  2 – Rarely 
  3 – Occasionally/Sometimes 
  4 – Frequently 
  5 – Always   
1. Research the company  
2. Research the job   
3. Brainstorm questions the interviewer is likely to ask 
4. Reflect on past work experiences that might be relevant to the new job 
5. Practice answering interview questions  
6. Think about the questions the applicant might wish to ask the interviewer 
7. Write down questions to ask the interviewer to take along to the interview 
 
Manipulation Check 
1. Did the applicant ask the interviewer questions at the end of the interview?  
a. Yes 
b. No 
 
Evaluation of Applicant Questions 
This scale is only to be completed for just the applicant who asks questions. 
1. The questions the applicant asked the interviewer were good ones. 
2. The questions asked by the applicant reflected positively on him or her. 
3. I had a positive reaction to the questions the applicant asked the interviewer. 
4. The applicant should have more wisely chosen the questions that he/she asked. (RC) 
5. I do not feel the applicant should have asked the particular questions that he or she did. 
(RC) 
6. The applicant asked questions to which he or she should have known the answers already 
(RC) 
 
Interviewer’s Beliefs about Questions 
---PAGE 174---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
173 
1. If an applicant asks questions during the interview, when should the applicant ask them? 
a. At the beginning of the interview 
b. At the end of the interview 
c. Throughout the interview as they naturally come up 
2. Is it okay for applicant to ask questions during job interviews? 
a. Yes, applicant should ask questions if they have them. 
b. Yes, applicant should ask questions but only if and when the interviewer asks for 
them. 
c. No, the applicant should not ask the interviewer questions during the job 
interview? 
 
Experience Conducting Interviews 
1. How frequently do you conduct employment interviews? 
a. I never conduct employment interviews (o times year) 
b. I rarely conduct employment interviews (a few times a year) 
c. I sometimes conduct employment interviews (a few times a quarter) 
d. I frequently conduct employment interviews (a few times a month) 
e. Conducting employment interviews is a primary part of my job (a few times a 
week or more) 
2. How would you describe your interviewing skills? 
a. I don’t know – I have never conducted an employment interview 
b. I am a novice, and would consider myself at a beginner level 
c. My interviewing skills are average – I may not be the best, but I am competent 
d. I am a strong interviewer, and consider myself quite skilled at it 
e. I am an expert interviewer, and believe I excel at interviewing job applicants 
3. Approximately how many employment interviews have you conducted over the past year 
(enter a number)? 
4. Approximately how many employment interviews have you conducted over the course of 
your career (enter a number)? 
---PAGE 175---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
174 
5. How long of a career have you had thus far (this is the total of all years spent working, 
not including lapses in employment. This does not have to be at the same job or 
organization). Please enter a number in months and years. 
 
Demographics 
1. Gender 
a. Male 
b. Female 
2. Age (in years) 
3. Ethnicity 
a. African American/Black 
b. Asian/Pacific Islander 
c. Caucasian/White 
d. Hispanic/Latino 
e. Native American 
f. Other (Please Specify) 
4. Are you a U.S. Citizen? 
a. Yes 
b. No 
5. Is English your first language? 
a. Yes 
b. No 
6. Are you employed? 
a. Yes 
b. No 
7. Do you work full time or part time? 
a. Full Time 
b. Part Time 
8. Did you have trouble understanding any of the questions on this survey? 
a. Yes 
---PAGE 176---
EFFECT OF APPLICANT’S QUESTIONS 
 
 
175 
b. No 
9. Please provide a short description of what you think this study was about below (Open 
Ended). 
10. Please provide any other comments you have for the researcher below (Open Ended). 